---
title: Mini-Lecture 14.4 - Methods and processes for good
  decision-making
---

# Metadata

## Keywords

-   Stakeholder involvement

-   Tolerable thresholds

-   Adaptation pathways

## Authors

-   Jasper Verschuur

## Short description

In this lecture we will look at processes for good decision-making, and
the various applications of bottom-up risk analysis. The stakeholders
are the central actors here, identifying critical thresholds and the
preferred adaptation options that can then be systemically tested for
suitability by the modeller.

## Learning objectives

-   Identify the key processes of stakeholder engagement
-   Explain what a bottom-up vulnerability analysis is
-   Understand the need for sequential decision-making for adaptation
    purposes.

# Lecture content

## Introduction

In mini-lectures 14.1-14.3, we discussed the various methods of
performing risk analyses that take a wide range of uncertainties into
account and identify interventions that are robust against these
uncertainties. We often use these types of analyses to perform
stress-testing exercises, in which we evaluate under what scenarios an
undesirable outcome occurs, as defined by the decision-makers.

In order to identify these undesirable outcomes, or critical thresholds,
we need to involve stakeholders early in the process. Stakeholder
engagement is essential to (1) guide the modeller by understanding the
uncertainty space that they need to consider, and (2) helps to
effectively communicate the results.

The various stages of stakeholder engagement are data gathering,
identifying gaps, prioritisation of the most important variables,
identification of critical thresholds which lead to system failure, and
to select suitable solutions to consider.

The critical thresholds are difficult to establish and often depend on
the aversion to risk of the decision-maker. The moment a critical
threshold is exceeded typically also coincides with the moment a certain
decision must be made to, for instance, upgrade the existing
infrastructure system. Therefore, these critical moments in time are
often referred to as policy tipping points. Figure 14.4.1 illustrates
how different paths (a/b/c) lead to different risk outcomes, with the
acceptable, tolerable or unacceptable risk states of the system
[@Hall2012]. A similar analysis can be performed for individual
infrastructure assets, networks, or infrastructure systems.

**Figure 14.4.1:** Three strategies and their resulting risk outcome,
which can be either unacceptable, tolerable or acceptable: (a) is the
do-nothing scenario in which risk will increase in the future, (b) is
the upfront investment scenario to keep risk tolerable, and (c) is the
periodic upgrading scenario to keep risk tolerable [@Hall2012]

## Bottom-up vulnerability analysis

In the next few sections, we will look at various methods in which a
'bottom-up' analysis is adopted to determine suitable pathways to a
desirable risk threshold.

A bottom-up analysis, or bottom-up vulnerability analysis, starts with
exploring the different thresholds that are deemed to be intolerable,
and the associated decisions that must be made when these thresholds are
exceeded. This can, for instance, be the amount of sea level rise that
flood defences can manage before needing an upgrade, or the changes in
temperature and precipitation, which water utilities need to expand
storage capacity for.

Through a modelling exercise that uses a range of scenarios of future
changes in critical variables, the output with respect to the
pre-defined states can be determined. For the scenario leading to the
undesirable state, we can estimate what the risk exceeding this state
is, and the combination of parameters that lead to this undesirable
state [@Brown2012]. This combination of parameters and their
resulting system state is sometimes called a 'response surface'.

In Figure 14.4.2, the safe operations space (blue) for a reservoir in
northern Italy was evaluated under changes in both temperature and
precipitation [@Culley2016]. Large changes in precipitation leads to
increased flooding, causing the system to fail, while a large increase
in temperature leads to irrigation failures (failure to supply water to
irrigation). By looking at a large number of climate simulations, the
authors could determine the likelihoods that future scenarios are in the
non-blue areas.

    Figure 14.4.2: A system response surface of a reservoir in northern Italy with changes in temperature and precipitation as the critical parameters. The blue dots illustrate the conditions at which the reservoir can continue to operate [@Culley2016] 

## Adaptation pathways for multiple criteria

In the previous sections, we demonstrated the need for stakeholder
engagement throughout the decision-making process in order to make
informed and robust decisions. In reality, however, decision-makers
often have different priorities and have varying opinions on acceptable
thresholds and the type of adaptation options that they prefer. A
multi-stakeholder platform is therefore needed to create a consensus on
the critical thresholds to use for design.

Moreover, alongside choosing the adaptation options that effectively
reduce risk and are cost-efficient, other objectives can be set for the
analysis. For instance, a study looked at suitable adaptation options
(raising levees, re-operating reservoirs) for the Iowa river (United
States) in terms of flood protection (floodplain inundation), but also
in terms of their implications for the ecology of the river (flow
recession) [@Poff2016]. In this example, illustrated in Figure
14.4.3, they showed how mutually acceptable adaptation options could be
identified given the uncertainty in precipitation and streamflow. In the
end, a combination of raising levees and re-operating the reservoirs had
the largest acceptable solution space (see Figure 14.4.3 right panels).

Therefore, it is important to come up with suitable indicators
beforehand that meet the demands of all stakeholders involved. In some
cases, synergies between different objectives can be identified, whereas
in other cases trade-offs exist. In this example, the latter was true;
where in the status-quo (top panels Figure 14.4.3) there is only a very
small overlap (right panels) between the available budget (left panels),
the acceptable flood risk (middle-left panels) and the ecosystem health
criteria (middle-right panels).

**Figure 14.4.3:** The solution space of acceptable outcomes (white in
right panels) taking into account cost constraints (left), flood risk
reduction (middle-left) and ecology (middle-right). The top row is the
status quo, while the next three rows cover different adaptation
options. The solution space is set out against changes in precipitation
and mean river flow [@Poff2016]

## Dynamic adaptation pathways

Apart from identifying when and if a certain failure state will be
reached, it is important to evaluate when decisions have to be made and,
if multiple options can be considered over time, what pathways leads to
the most optimal decisions over time. Therefore, insights into the
evolution of the system over time and the different sequential
decision-making options are essential.

This is important for two reasons:

1.  Infrastructure interventions sometimes have long lead times. Thus,
    knowing when decisions must be made to plan and implement adaptation
    options, in order to prevent a critical threshold from exceeding, is
    important for decision-making.

2.  At the time a decision has to be made, it might not yet be clear if
    this intervention was indeed required. Methods such as 'dynamic
    adaptive policy pathways' may assist in this process
    [@Haasnoot2013].

This approach is illustrated in Figure 14.4.4 for adapting the Dutch
water supply system to climate change and socio-economic growth
[@Haasnoot2013]. A large number of options are evaluated (y-axis).
After implementing such options, critical tipping points may eventually
be exceeded, which will require a jump to another intervention. By
evaluating all combinations, and their associated lead times, benefits
and costs, the most optimal adaptive pathways can be identified,
including the moment when new actions should be taken. This type of
approach presents a blueprint for planning and helps to easily
communicate this to policymakers.

**Figure 14.4.4:** An example of the application of dynamic adaptative
pathways for the water supply system of The Netherlands. The (thick)
coloured lines show all possible pathways to maintain system functioning
until 2100 without exceeding any adaptation tipping points
[@Haasnoot2013]

## Exploring long-term adaptation options

A similar exercise has been carried out to identify adaptation pathways
for the city of London. Within the Thames Estuary 2100 project,
adaptation options to prevent the city from being flooded had to be
designed, looking ahead almost 300 years [@Hall2019].

The main objective was to decide whether or when to raise the existing
Thames barrier or move it to another location, which depends on the
expected rate of sea level rise. If the existing barrier has to be
closed too frequently, very large pumping quantities are needed to
discharge water out of the river. Within the scenarios, the barrier can
be moved from the existing location in Silvertown to new locations in
Long Reach or Canvey, which reduce the flood risk.

Costs are associated with each solution, covering both upfront costs and
variable costs. For instance, increasing the crest levels of defences
has a large upfront cost, but the variable costs are relatively low,
e.g. overdesigning the crest levels can be done at relatively low
additional cost.

There is a range of feasible and mutually exclusive adaptation pathways
(see Figure 14.4.5). Different critical sea level rise thresholds were
identified that lead to a shift in the location of the barrier. The
differences between the pathways and their costs can be compared,
resulting in the potential of decision regrets: the total investment
costs + the residual risk of the decision relative to the best
performing one. This is shown in Figure 14.4.6, showing that under very
large sea level rise values (\>3m), both staying at Silvertown and
moving towards Canvey are extremely costly given the risk benefits they
provide.

**Figure 14.4.5:** The different adaptation pathways as a function of
the rise in sea level by 2300 [@Hall2019]

**Figure 14.4.6:** The regret of choosing a certain pathway compared to
the best performing pathway given different sea level rise scenarios for
2300 [@Hall2019]

## Summary

In this lecture, we looked at processes for good decision-making that
start with the identification and involvement of all stakeholders. These
stakeholders are important as they help identify tolerable risk
thresholds and acceptable adaptation options. Moreover, different
methodologies are presented to identify and communicate suitable
adaptation pathways towards resilience.
