---
title: Mini-Lecture 7.4 --Strategic evaluation of infrastructure in
  practice
---



keywords:

-   Strategic performance

-   Infrastructure interdependencies

authors:

-   Orlando Roman

---

This mini-lecture we use the case studies of Curaçao, Saint Lucia and
Palestine to provide examples of performance evaluation of strategies
and decision-making processes for infrastructure planning.

# Learning objectives

-   List different indicators used to evaluate strategies in practice
-   Identify infrastructure interdependencies between sectors.



# Overview of infrastructure strategy evaluation in practice

This mini-lecture will showcase different applications of the National
Infrastructure Systems MODel -- International (NISMOD-Int) for strategy
evaluation in infrastructure planning. Strategy evaluation and
decision-making were used in a range of international contexts including
Curaçao, Saint Lucia and Palestine and will be described in detail here.
Furthermore, the evaluations include waste and water sectors and a
cross-sectoral analysis that provides an overview of infrastructure
interdependencies in the long-term.

Alongside the descriptions of these cases, the different potential
strategies and the different indicators used in each country will also
provide insight on the participatory nature of this process and how
different contexts, needs and priorities shape the infrastructure
planning process.

# Waste management strategy evaluation in Curaçao (part I)

The waste management system in Curaçao heavily depends on landfills,
which will run out of capacity in the next five years. Figure 7.4.1a
shows that landfill capacity will be depleted by 2026 and without other
interventions, the waste generated thereafter might remain unmanaged. As
seen in mini-lecture 6.4, different waste strategies were proposed for
Curaçao, including "Baseline", "Inaction", "Circular Economy" and
"Technology-led".

Figure 7.4.1b ilustrates the waste options of each strategy by 2030.
Half of the "baseline" strategy still depends on landfills, while the
"circular economy" strategy proposes 60% of recycling, and the
"technology-led" strategy includes a new option of producing energy from
waste and anaerobic digestion consuming about 50% of waste generation
without needing any landfills.

**Figure 7.4.1:** Waste treatment by strategy [@Fuldauer2019]

In Figure 7.4.2, the aforementioned strategies were assessed based on
their performance against three important Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) indicators: waste treated, number of nationals employed and
national recycling rate. The evaluation was made by integrating the low,
moderate and high projections to evaluate the effect of the uncertainty
on the decision-making process. The technology-led strategy is the only
one able to treat 100% of the waste until 2050. However, the circular
economy approach shows a better performance on employment and recycling.

**Figure 7.4.2:** Performance of waste strategies on SDG indicators
[@Fuldauer2019]

# Waste management strategy evaluation in Curaçao (part II)

The three main strategies for Curaçao were also evaluated against cost
and carbon emissions, as shown in Figure 7.4.3. While there is an
overlap in the range of projections, the technology-led strategy
performs better in carbon emissions, and the circular economy strategy
is more cost-effective. Inaction performs worst for both indicators.

**Figure 7.4.3:** Performance of waste strategies against cost and
cumulative carbon [@Fuldauer2019]

The performance analysis developed for Curaçao shows that under a
moderate growth scenario, the circular economy strategy outperforms the
other ones. However, under the high waste generation scenario, the
technology-led strategy appears to be a better choice because circular
economy is equally costly but emits more CO~2~.

The selection of a predetermined strategy is not mandatory. Normally,
the national infrastructure strategy is developed in a participatory
process by blending interventions from different strategies. Figure
7.4.4 shows the waste management pathway selected for Curaçao, which
ultimately combined different interventions to meet waste generation and
produce energy as an outcome of the system.

![](media/image4.png){width="6.604058398950131in"
height="3.6944444444444446in"}

**Figure 7.4.4:** Waste management pathway [@Adshead2018]

# Strategic performance for water provision in Palestine

As shown in mini-lecture 6.4, five infrastructure strategies were
developed for the Fast Track Infrastructure Analysis for Palestine,
depending on their degree of investment levels and provision of
infrastructure. The lower level of investment and provision was called
the "No build" strategy, which was used as a benchmark. An intermediate
level of investment and provision was called the "Status Quo", and the
highest level of investment and provision was called "Infrastructure-led
development". Intermediate strategies were called "Pipeline" and
"Efficiency with Scarcity" (see mini-lecture 6.4). Figure 7.4.5 shows an
analysis on how the different strategies perform under the central (or
most likely) scenario of water demand. It is noticeable that the only
alternative that meets future demand is the "Infrastructure-led
development" with the "Status Quo" and "Efficiency with Scarcity"
strategies falling short.

![](media/image5.png){width="5.504348206474191in"
height="4.424381014873141in"}

**Figure 7.4.5:** Strategic Performance for Water Supply in Gaza
[@Ives2018]

This analysis was developed by using an expected 100 litres/capita/day
consumption based on WHO recommendations. While this can be achieved for
the "central" projection, a more pessimistic projection called "unstable
adversity" was only able to achieve 30 litres/capita/day.

# Infrastructure interdependencies in Saint Lucia

For Saint Lucia, the National Infrastructure Assessment evaluated the
electricity, water, wastewater and solid waste sectors. As shown in
Figure 7.4.6, cross-sectoral interdependencies were analysed in a
qualitative manner. Strong interdependencies were found between
transport as an important driver of tourism demand (by expanding ports
and airports) and all other sectors. Other strong interdependencies were
found between water and wastewater, irrigation with solid waste and
wastewater (treated wastewater can be used for irrigation). Other
interdependencies were considered moderate or weak but still important
to evaluate for national planning purposes.

![](media/image6.png){width="5.964846894138232in"
height="7.358490813648294in"}

**Figure 7.4.6:** Cross-sectoral infrastructure interdependencies in
Saint Lucia [@Adshead2020]

Figure 7.4.7 illustrates quantitative relations between sectors. The
expansion of ports and airports might increase the demand for
electricity, water, wastewater and solid waste by between 9% and 36% by
2050. While anaerobic digestion and waste-to-energy projects are capable
of diverting between 26% and 35% of the waste stream, they can also
produce between 6% and 33% of electricity demand by 2050.
Interdependencies between water and wastewater were also quantified
including water efficiencies (reducing losses and consumption) and
effluent reuse. Both options can generate a reduction of between 7.6%
and 20% in demand for both sectors.

![](media/image7.png){width="5.758819991251094in"
height="3.5692311898512687in"}

**Figure 7.4.7:** Quantification of cross-sectoral infrastructure
interdependencies for Saint Lucia by 2050 [@Adshead2020]

# Summary 

In this mini-lecture we illustrate previous concepts with practical
applications of strategic evaluation on real cases. We explored waste
management, water systems and infrastructure interdependencies in
Curacao, Palestine and Saint Lucia, respectively. In this way we review
the differences between contexts, assumptions and sectors.
