---
title: Mini-Lecture 7.2 -- Principles of decision analysis under
  uncertainty
---

# Metadata 

## Keywords

-   Flaw of Averages

-   Robustness

-   Flexibility

## Authors 

-   Orlando Roman

## Short description

In this mini-lecture we will introduce some key concepts of decision
analysis focused mainly on uncertainty. We will introduce multi-criteria
decision analysis (MCDA) as a classic method for making decisions and
the concepts of robustness and flexibility.

## Learning objectives

-   Describe the types of uncertainty and when deep uncertainty arises
-   Describe some approaches of MCDA
-   Explain the difference between robust and adaptive plans

# Lecture content

## Overview on decision analysis

One of the bases of decision theory is the concept of expected utility
as formulated by @Savage1954. In this theory, one can formulate a
personal utility function, which is a function about how one values
different aspects, and is by nature, subjective. One can also formulate
a probability distribution of the potential outcomes of a certain
decision. In this way, one can optimise the expected value of the
utility function under the probability distribution of outcomes and
obtain the best decision. While this approach is considered rational for
normal decisions, sometimes it's not applicable to infrastructure
decision-making. First of all, given the variety of stakeholders and
objectives, it's not easy to compute a single expected utility function.
Secondly, infrastructure decisions don't only focus on optimising
benefits, but also on reducing losses from worst-case scenarios. An
infrastructure that performs well on average but loses functionality for
an entire year is normally not considered acceptable. This is commonly
known as the "Flaw of Averages" and occurs when the analysis is carried
out for a "most likely" scenario or using a "best prediction" instead of
using a deeper uncertainty evaluation.

The concepts elaborated in this mini-lecture will therefore tackle the
challenges of making decisions under uncertainty using a participatory
and adaptive approach.

## Types of risk and uncertainty

Long-term planning is particularly difficult due to the inherent
uncertainty about the future. Figure 7.2.1 shows the range of
uncertainty types that can be present in a problem. The left side
describes the classical predict-then-act approach, starting with
determinism, in which all the factors involved are known; and the
statistical risk, in which the imprecision could be quantified by
probabilities. However, long-term strategies, due to unpredictable new
technologies, changing trends in demography and societal behaviours, and
climate change effects, usually fall under the right side, characterised
by deep uncertainty.

**Figure 7.2.1:** Different types of uncertainty [@Buurman2016]

When we face uncertainty, the premise that we should decide to follow
our best predictions, as in the statistical approach, has been
questioned for a while [@Gardenfors1982]. Usually, our problems face
deep uncertainty which stems from cases where knowledge is diffuse, the
experts do not agree, or the number of assumptions made through the
estimation process makes the results doubtful. This issue has produced
important literature on Decision Making under Deep Uncertainty (DMDU)
methods and applications, as will be seen in mini-lecture 7.3.

## Multi-criteria decision analysis

A decision-making process evaluates a set of alternatives by using
different criteria, including attributes and objectives. Attributes are
the measurable properties of the model such as the cost, capacity and
emissions of specific infrastructure options or strategies, as well as
related or dependent characteristics such as the location or lifetime.
Objectives are understood as statements about the desired state of the
system [@Malczewski2015] or defined as visions or goals, as outlined
in Lecture 5.

For the decision-making process, an "a priori" approach uses a set of
relative weights to build an objective function for optimisation
[@Drobne2009]. For instance, a decision-maker can say that reducing
emissions has a 50% importance (weight), while cost and reliability have
30% and 20% importance, respectively. In contrast, an "a posteriori"
approach does not need to provide relative weights beforehand, it tries
to explore the whole set of alternatives and evaluate the trade-offs
between different and conflicting objectives [@Malczewski1999]. For
instance, an energy plan can have low cost and high emissions by
continuing to use fossil fuels, or high cost and low emissions by
changing to renewables. With an "a posteriori" approach, the
decision-maker does not need to decide how much they prefer to reduce
emissions or costs by, instead they can look at the whole set of
options, evaluate the trade-offs and potentially make a compromised
decision. The set of optimal solutions is commonly referred to as a
Pareto Frontier [@Cohon1978].

There are several methods used in the industry that use MCDA approaches,
such as the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) ELECTRE or PROMETHEE.

## Robustness in decision making

Robustness is the concept of making decisions in the present that will
also achieve objectives in the future. In this sense, decision-makers do
not try to generate the maximum value by looking at the most likely
projection of the future. Instead, they try to explore a broad range of
future scenarios and select the strategy that performs best in most of
them. There are several possible performance indicators to look at. The
two most commonly used are: (1) robustness, or selecting the strategy
that performs best in most futures, or (2) regrets, minimising the
potential losses under all potential futures.

Figure 7.2.2 shows different projections of precipitation and
temperature changes for a hydropower project from different climate
models. The range of values evident is between +20% to -30%, resulting
in a huge challenge for the project design. Given the non-flexible
nature of a hydropower dam, in this case, a robust decision that
minimises possible regrets is critical.

**Figure 7.2.2:** Projected mean changes in annual temperature (Â°C) and
precipitation (%) for a hydropower project [@Taner2017]

## Flexibility and adaptation in decision making

In contrast with the concept of robustness, flexibility takes a
sequential decision-making approach. This means, flexibility does not
try to make only the best decisions in the present, but intends to also
provide options so the system can adapt through time. Adaptive
management was originally developed for the management of natural
resources under uncertainty as *"an integrated, multidisciplinary and
systematic approach to improving management and accommodating change by
learning from the outcomes"* [@Holling1978]. Hence, the value of
flexibility -- the capability to adapt over time -- is a well-known
concept developed in recent techniques for making decisions under
uncertainty.

Flexibility is an important advantage for two main reasons:

> \(1\) Adaptive strategies do not usually require a large capital
> investment and are more attractive because they postpone investments
>
> \(2\) Postponing decisions into the future has the advantage that in
> the future there may be much more information and less uncertainty
> than in the present.

Figure 7.2.3 shows an analysis in which the decision to expand or not to
expand a reservoir dam depends on a variable threshold through time. If
the threshold is likely to be reached, the decision-maker may consider
the expansion of the reservoir dam to accommodate for future demands
and, therefore, design it with flexibility. If expanding the dam is
difficult, another option might be to prepare small desalination or
treatment plants where needed, increasing the flexibility of the water
supply system.

**Figure 7.2.3:** Drawdown threshold for the decision to expand or not
in a reservoir dam [@Fletcher2019]

## Summary 

In this mini-lecture we introduced the Flaw of Averages to illustrate
the mistake of making decisions based on average performance. Then we
explored the types of uncertainty that exist in different problems and
some concepts of multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA). Finally, we
described the concepts of robustness and flexibility and their
importance for infrastructure planning.
