---
title: Mini-Lecture 7.3 -- Methods for decision making under uncertainty
---

 

keywords:

-   Decision making under deep uncertainty

-   Exploratory analysis

-   Adaptive planning

authors:

-   Orlando Roman

---

In this mini-lecture we will describe the most classical methods for
decision-making under deep uncertainty (DMDU), looking at their
applicability and differences.

# Learning objectives 

-   List and describe some DMDU methods
-   Explain when a particular method is preferred.

 

# Introduction

One typical approach to address uncertain problems is through the
evaluation of scenarios as explorations of plausible futures, where
sensitivity analyses are carried out on the inputs to see the
consequences in the outputs. However, evaluating a deeply uncertain
future through a traditional scenario technique has important
challenges:

-   In complex systems, it is difficult to clearly visualise the
    relationship between inputs and outputs. These are often non-linear,
    with regions of extreme sensitivity to particular assumptions, and
    threshold points that are difficult to identify.

-   The number of possible scenarios that can be analysed are limited,
    even for visualisation purposes, so instead a small number of
    plausible alternatives tends to be evaluated, and only those that
    are believed to contain the most important uncertainties are taken
    into account. Normally, the entire spectrum of the problem cannot be
    evaluated.

-   It is difficult to establish monitoring criteria, decision rules or
    triggering points for decision-making, as these rely on how the
    future unfolds.

Hence, in the face of deep uncertainty, the decision-making community is
using innovative decision support methods. These tools combine creative
thinking of scenario techniques, the capabilities of stress testing and
the deliberative process of decision-making in a systematised fashion,
thus reducing possible biases. The most commonly used methods will be
described in this mini-lecture.

# Exploratory analysis

One of the first decision-making under deep uncertainty (DMDU) tools,
and the basis of the most recent approaches, is the so-called
"Exploratory Analysis", which is a wide exploration of many alternative
scenarios [@Bankes1993] opening up a range of plausible future
states. Figure 7.3.1 shows different approaches for analysing future
scenarios. The normative approach is based on the best forecast, while
the predictive approach intends to account for variability in the future
state. On the other hand, the exploratory approach takes a wider look
into the future alternatives asking "what if" questions and evaluating
all plausible alternatives. Therefore, the exploration of potential
futures might guide the decision-making process by finding
vulnerabilities and best strategies. In principle, when the future
proves hard to predict, plans ought to be robust and flexible
[@Lempert2019]. One approach is to evaluate this set of future states
to identify robust decisions in the present, that is, decisions that
work well whatever the future may be. A second, and complementary
approach, is to identify decision points to adapt over time, encouraging
flexibility for uncertainty management.

**Figure 7.3.1:** Types of future scenario approaches [@McGowan2019]

Some open source tools have been created with this purpose, such as the
Exploratory Modelling Analysis (EMA) Workbench [@Kwakkel2017]. This
tool has the capability of connecting any model created in different
programming languages and softwares, such as Vensim or Excel, to perform
computational experiments and deal with uncertainty. The main purpose of
the analysis is to find regions of sensitivity, grouping and
classification of future states or optimisation of strategies under
uncertainty.

# Robust decision-making (RDM)

Robust decision-making (RDM) is a method that uses analytics to perform
an exploratory model allowing the evaluation of hundreds of alternative
strategies, uncertainties and possible futures [@Groves2007]. RDM
starts by proposing possible strategies which are then evaluated against
different possible futures, checking vulnerabilities and generating
feedback loops to build even better strategies.

![https://media.springernature.com/original/springer-static/image/chp%3A10.1007%2F978-3-030-05252-2_2/MediaObjects/427530_1\_En_2\_Fig1_HTML.png](media/image2.png){width="5.441666666666666in"
height="3.914095581802275in"}

**Figure 7.3.2:** Iterative steps in RDM [@Lempert2019]

Figure 7.3.2 shows the steps of the process:

1.  First, 'decision framing' is where stakeholders identify the
    alternatives, uncertainties and performance indicators they wish to
    evaluate (wider range).

2.  Second, 'evaluate strategy across futures' is a systematic
    development of the entire spectrum of possible scenarios, generating
    a range of futures, against which the performance of the originally
    proposed alternatives will be evaluated.

3.  Third, 'vulnerability analysis' is where data mining and machine
    learning algorithms are used to identify the vulnerabilities of each
    alternative, which allow modification or unifying alternatives, thus
    creating new ones. This feedback loop is the most creative process
    and where the method generates the most value.

4.  Fourth, 'trade-off analysis' is where the different alternatives
    generated are compared based on their performance, such as their
    robustness (best in most futures), regrets (the difference between
    the chosen and the optimal solution) or others identified. This step
    allows a transparent decision-making process for the different
    stakeholders.

5.  Lastly, based on the results, the process allows to develop new
    futures and strategies to be evaluated in a new round of analysis.

The RDM method allows iteration and learning in each round of analysis
until a satisfactory robust strategy is found.

# Real/engineering options analysis

The previous methods exploit concepts such as the exploration of futures
and robustness. In contrast, Real Options Analysis [@deNeufville2011]
maintains the exploratory approach and focuses on flexibility -- the
capability to adapt over time -- which is also used in the Dynamic
Adaptive Planning approach, described in the next section.

In the treatment of uncertainty, the Real or Engineering Options
methodology is able to explore technical alternatives (such as the size,
height or capacities) with more depth than other DMDU methods
[@deNeufville2019]. Therefore, this methodology is well suited for
evaluating individual engineering projects under uncertainty. Real
Options assumes that adding flexibility has a cost (e.g. building a
power plant with the ability to be expanded is more costly than not) and
intends to estimate the value of flexibility under future uncertainty.
This means, it estimates if the benefit of the added flexibility is
worth the cost, given future uncertainty.

Figure 7.3.3 shows the results of 1,000 simulations under different
climatological and physical variables. The results computed how many
times an expansion of desalination capacity was needed over the lifetime
of the project. Therefore, the likeliness and timing of potential
expansion can be evaluated by the decision-maker.

![https://cfn-live-content-bucket-iop-org.s3.amazonaws.com/journals/1748-9326/14/11/114022/1/erlab4664f5_hr.jpg?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAYDKQL6LTV7YY2HIK&Expires=1617616674&Signature=ulX7WrEa1ANfEZcOVaOjnYtOGxg%3D](media/image3.jpeg){width="3.7852996500437444in"
height="3.330074365704287in"}

**Figure 7.3.3:** Distribution of desalination capacity added over 1,000
simulations [@Fletcher2019]

# Dynamic Adaptive Planning

The RDM and Real Options methods can be complemented very well with the
dynamic adaptive approach [@Kwakkel2016]. While the RDM method allows
understanding of the functioning of systems, identifies vulnerabilities
and allows a transparent comparison between the options, adaptive
planning emphasises dynamic adaptation over time.

Figure 7.3.4 shows a simple example of an adaptive pathway applied to
long-term planning, where there are four possible strategies: A, B, C
and D. The Figure shows the concept of tipping points: where the
strategies are no longer satisfactory, a new course of action is
required.

![](media/image4.png){width="4.594936570428697in"
height="2.4423786089238844in"}

**Figure 7.3.4:** Adaptation pathways map [@Haasnoot2013]

For instance, Actions A and D are effective in the long term (usually
these are expensive alternatives or with negative impacts on other
fronts). However, if one chooses Action B, it will become necessary to
change strategy after 10 years (e.g. due to increased demand), this
being a tipping point where the strategy is no longer satisfactory. The
same happens with Action C, which needs to be changed in the long term
because a tipping point will also be reached (e.g. due to climate
change).

In this way, different possible pathways can be generated embedding
flexibility that allows adaptation over time to other, better
strategies. In practice, the estimation of tipping points or adaptation
triggers is not easy but can be obtained [@Hall2019].

# Summary 

In this mini-lecture we explained the need of more sophisticated methods
when facing complex systems and a huge range of possible scenarios. Then
we described four of the most used methods in practice: exploratory
analysis, robust decision making (RDM), real/engineering options and
dynamic adaptive pathways.
