---
title: "Mini-Lecture 18.1 - []{#_Hlk67331875 .anchor}Decision-making for
  nature-based solutions"
---

# Metadata

## Keywords

-   Nature-based solution

-   Active adaptive management

-   Evidenced-based decision-making

## Authors 

-   Yu Mo

## Short description 

This lecture provides an overview of the process of decision-making when
planning nature-based solutions. This lecture also introduces the common
tools that can be used in decision-making processes. Particularly, this
lecture discussed the uncertainty in the process, and how adaptive
management and evidence-based decision-making can help to solve that. A
case study demonstrating the concepts is presented.

## Learning objectives 

-   Understand what the key considerations are when planning
    nature-based solutions

-   Learn how active adaptive management and evidenced-based
    decision-making can be applied when planning nature-based solutions

-   Obtain a basic understanding of how to account for uncertainty in
    the planning of nature-based solutions.

# Lecture content

## Decision-making in nature-based solutions 

An effective decision-making mechanism should allow informed,
transparent, and ethical decisions towards the sustainable
implementation of nature-based solutions. It should be evidence-based
and able to effectively connect stakeholders, policy makers, and
scientists at different levels (local, regional-level, country-level,
and international). The Millennium Ecosystem Assessment has identified
the following elements to be critical in improving decision-making
processes in ecosystem management for human well-being [@MEA2005]:

-   Use the best available information, including the value of marketed
    and nonmarketed ecosystem services

-   Ensure transparency and the effective and informed participation of
    important stakeholders

-   Recognise that not all values at stake can be quantified, and thus
    quantification can provide a false objectivity in decision processes

-   Strive for efficiency, but not at the expense of effectiveness

-   Consider equity and vulnerability in terms of the distribution of
    costs and benefits

-   Ensure accountability and provide for regular monitoring and
    evaluation

-   Consider cumulative and cross-scale effects and assess trade-offs
    across different ecosystem services.

In particular, emphasis should be placed on the following known barriers
to the successful implementation of nature-based solutions [@MEA2005;
@Bauduceau2015]:

-   Inappropriate institutional and governance arrangements, including
    the presence of corruption and weak systems of regulation and
    accountability

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Market failures and the misalignment of economic incentives

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Failure in representing the needs of the local communities,
    particularly those lacking political and economic power (such as
    women and indigenous groups)

-   Underinvestment in the development and diffusion of technologies
    that could increase the efficiency of ecosystem services and reduce
    the harmful impacts

-   Insufficient knowledge and poor use of knowledge on ecosystem
    management that can enhance benefits from these services while
    conserving resources

-   Lack of information on the value of nonmarketed ecosystem services
    and the linkage between these services and human well-being.

## Tools for better decision-making 

There are many tools that can be used to assist decision-making
concerning ecosystems and their services at a variety of scales,
including global, sub-global, and local (see Table 18.1.1)
[@MEA2005]:

-   **Deliberative tools:** Tools that facilitate transparency and
    stakeholder participation, including neighborhood forums, citizens'
    juries, community issues groups, consensus conferences, electronic
    democracy, focus groups, issue forums, and ecosystem service user
    forums

-   **Information-gathering tools:** Tools that help with collection of
    data and opinions, such as citizens' research panels, deliberative
    opinion polls, environmental impact assessments, participatory rural
    appraisal, and rapid rural appraisal

-   **Planning tools:** Tools that help to evaluate different potential
    policy options, such as consensus participation, cost-benefit
    analysis, multi-criteria analysis, participatory learning and
    action, stakeholder decision analysis, trade-off analysis, and
    visioning exercises.

Particularly, there are five planning tools that are commonly used in
assessing optimisation, equity, thresholds, and uncertainty of decisions
for nature-based solution planning:

-   **Cost-benefit analysis:** Evaluation of the strengths and
    weaknesses of different options for the determination of the best
    option for achieving benefits while preserving cost

-   **Risk assessment:** Identification and analysis of (future) risk on
    the system and making judgments based on the tolerability of the
    risk

-   **Multi-criteria analysis:** Explicitly evaluating multiple
    conflicting criteria in decision-making

-   **Precautionary principle:** Understanding of the potential negative
    impact of a decision when extensive scientific knowledge on the
    matter is lacking

-   **Vulnerability analysis:** Definition, identification,
    classification, and prioritisation of vulnerable elements in the
    system.

### Table 18.1.1: Applicability of decision support methods and frameworks [@MEA2005]

  Method                    Optimisation   Equity   Thresholds   Uncertainty
  ------------------------- -------------- -------- ------------ -------------
  Cost-benefit analysis     \+             \+       \-           \+
  Risk assessment           \+             \+       ++           ++
  Multi-criteria analysis   ++             \+       \+           \+
  Precautionary principle   \+             \+       ++           ++
  Vulnerability analysis    \+             \+       ++           \+

++: direct application of the method by design

+: possible application with modification or (in the case of
uncertainty) the method has already been modified to handle uncertainty

--: weak but not impossible applicability with significant effort

## The uncertainty of nature-based solutions 

Nature-based solutions should be factored into infrastructure and
development planning from the outset, to ensure sustainable, resilient
and climate-compatible development. Nevertheless, the integration of
nature-based solutions in planning adds additional layers of
uncertainty, including: 

-   **Resilience:** Both nature-based solutions and the issues that they
    are addressing, such as flooding and urban heating, are influenced
    by climate change and evolve under uncertainty

-   **Functional performance:** Predicting nature-based solutions
    performance can be imprecise (compared to traditional grey
    infrastructure) due to their adaptive nature and the uncertainties
    surrounding their future conditions that rely on long-term
    maintenance

-   **Temporal factors:** Many nature-based solutions take time to be
    implemented and achieve their full potential for service delivery,
    and some have seasonal functionality. The delays to benefit accrual
    means cost-benefit ratios can vary over time

-   **Unforeseen consequences:** Interconnectedness of nature means
    actions in one area can impact elsewhere in the system, but these
    are not always understood

-   **Governance:** Managing nature-based solutions under shifting
    social, economic, and political conditions is challenging,
    particularly where land rights are unclear. 

Active adaptive management can be a useful tool for reducing uncertainty
in ecosystem management decisions [@MEA2005]. The term "active"
adaptive management is used here to emphasise the key characteristic of
the original concept (which is frequently and inappropriately used to
mean"learning by doing"): the design of management programmes to test
hypotheses about how components of an ecosystem function and interact
and to thereby reduce uncertainty about the system more rapidly than
would otherwise occur. Given the high levels of uncertainty surrounding
coupled socioecological systems, the use of active adaptive management
is often warranted.

## Evidenced-based decision-making 

Evidenced-based decision-making can address the uncertainty in
nature-based solution implementation and provide communication among
various stakeholders. It requires using evidence to answer three key
issues [@Bauduceau2015]:

-   Is the proposed measure effective in addressing the problem? For
    example, how effective is tree planting in reducing air pollution?
    How does this differ between different tree species? How does this
    differ between different spacing patterns?

-   What are the most effective means of establishing and maintaining
    the green solution? For example, what is the success of the various
    means of establishing green roofs?

-   How does the effectiveness change with local conditions? Many will
    vary according to the climate, local ecology or societal variation.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
    The evidence should be assessed within a four-staged process:

1.  The first stage should be a collation of the possible interventions,
    with the objective of being as comprehensive as possible. These
    should be detailed, for example, listing all the possible means of
    reducing flood risk through changes in land management.

2.  The interventions need to be prioritised according to the likelihood
    of being implemented, for example, those that relate to urban
    environments are likely to be considered a priority.

3.  The published literature needs to be reviewed in a systematic and
    unbiased manner with the relevance and quality of the evidence
    assessed. The extent to which local environmental or social
    conditions modifies effectiveness needs to be determined, so it is
    possible to produce local solutions to local conditions.

4.  The results should be synthesised and presented to practitioners in
    a manner that can be used readily by a wide range of individuals,
    for example through existing websites.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```

## Case Study: Eco-safe roads in Nepal 

This study presents the implementation of eco-safe roads in Nepal
through a science-practice and policy approach [@Monty2017].
Landslides are a natural feature in Nepal (as shown in mini-lecture
16.3). However, some of the many community-built rural roads are in
landslide-prone areas and were built without proper technical guidance.
These roads are therefore prone to collapse, triggering landslides and
accelerating erosion rates, directly affecting economic development and
increasing vulnerability.

The project established three demonstration sites of eco-roads (Figure
18.1.1), which use ecosystem-based, locally adapted bioengineering
methods to increase the stability of landslide-prone rural roads. Its
main operational approach includes:

-   **Vulnerability and capacity assessment:** Using a combination of
    qualitative and quantitative data collection methods including
    geological assessments, remote sensing, and semi-structured
    interviews to collect geophysical and demo-economic information.

-   **Scientific research**: Biophysical research to establish
    rhizotrons and automated weather stations and to measure erosion
    rates. Socio-economic research was carried out through cost-benefit
    analysis to compare conventional roads with the eco-safe roads.

-   **Capacity building and awareness-raising:** Various training,
    cross-learning field visits, and workshops and results dissemination
    thorough mass media are conducted to promote knowledge exchange and
    awareness about eco-engineering.

The project has successfully demonstrated that eco-safe roads are
cost-effective and locally-adapted solutions. All the local communities
at the demonstration sites are actively seeking funding to extend the
bio-engineering works. The project's scientific research has generated
many scientific publications, and generated profound policy influence.
For example, Eco-Disaster Risk Reduction has now been integrated into
Nepal's National Strategic Framework for Nature Conservation
(2015-2030). The success of the project shows that (1) rigorous
scientific findings can strengthen policy arguments, and (2)
participation of the local communities and integration of local
livelihood benefits are critical in implementing nature-based solutions.

![](media/image1.png){width="6.5in"
height="2.2055555555555557in"}**Figure 18.1.1:** Demonstration site
Gharelu before interventions (left) after interventions (right)
[@Monty2017]

## Summary 

This lecture introduces the process of decision-making when planning
nature-based solutions and the common tools that can be used in the
decision-making process. Particularly, this lecture discussed the
uncertainly in implementing nature-based solutions, and how adaptive
management and evidence-based decision-making can help to cope with
that. A case study of constructing eco-roads in Nepal was presented to
demonstrate the concepts.
