---
title: Mini-Lecture 18.4 -- Implementing, monitoring and governing
  nature-based solutions (NbS) in infrastructure projects

keywords:

-   Participatory decision-making

-   Establishing safeguards

-   Adaptive management

authors:

-   Robyn Haggis

---

This lecture considers the importance of taking a participatory approach
to designing, implementing and governing nature-based solutions (NbS),
and the importance of developing social and biodiversity safeguards. The
need to consider timescale and take an adaptive management approach when
developing NbS projects is discussed, along with actions to support
scaling-up.

# Learning objectives {#learning-objectives-1}

-   Recall why it is important to engage local and indigenous
    communities in NbS projects
-   Explain why an adaptive management approach is beneficial in NbS
    projects
-   Explain why NbS projects should include social safeguards.



# Participatory approach

Approaches to integrate NbS over the project lifecycle (planning and
decision-making, implementation, operation and maintenance) should take
a participatory approach to include the full range of stakeholders in an
equitable and democratic manner [@IUCN2020a]. To maximise success,
particular attention should be paid to engaging local and indigenous
communities and NbS experts; these will be discussed here. Table 18.4.1
provides information on additional stakeholders who can be engaged.

## Local and indigenous communities

Social dimensions, including community willingness and commitment to the
solution, are key to the success and sustainability of NbS projects
[@Seddon2021;@IUCNnd]. If the community is not involved and does
not see the value of the ecosystem, they may knowingly or unknowingly
contribute to its decline [@WorldBank2017]. Equally, given the role
of nature in underpinning the three pillars of the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) (mini-lecture 15.2), including local
livelihoods, it is critical to ensure local and indigenous communities
are engaged and benefit from the project in order to prevent
marginalisation or unintended consequences which undermine the
achievement of the SDGs.

Local and indigenous communities (and other relevant stakeholders)
should be included in all aspects of the project, including solution
identification, planning, decision-making, implementation, monitoring,
stewardship and negotiation of trade-offs, and their inputs should be
meaningfully considered and addressed.

## Experts

Projects that aim to implement NbS must consider biophysical and
socioeconomic processes at different spatial and temporal scales. This
requires engagement with experts, from different disciplines such as
climate, hydrology, engineering, ecology, economics and social sciences
[@Seddon2021].

**Table 18.4.1:** Potential stakeholders to engage in NbS projects
[@Cohen-Shacham2019; @WorldBank2017]

  Stakeholder                        Description
  ---------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Local and indigenous communities   Local communities and indigenous people should be included at every stage
  Experts                            Experts are key to ensuring NbS are rooted in the local ecological context
  Government agencies                Undertake proactive government engagement with governments at multiple levels, from political leaders to government ministries, for assistance with policies, laws, regulations, research and community outreach
  Private sector                     Private sector companies should be consulted where relevant to the project
  Women                              Including women can contribute to long-term impacts of NbS interventions whilst progressing gender equity
  Youth                              Incorporating youth supports sustainability, resilience and long-term impact of NbS interventions, educates them in the importance of NbS and addresses intergenerational equity
  Bilateral aid agencies             These can offer more upstream, specialised expertise to help plan green-grey solutions
  Civil society organisations        Can facilitate local community engagement
  Development partners               To help develop and finance the project
  Potential investors                Develop supportive partnerships with those who can bring financial resources (e.g. potential investors)

# Setting social and environmental safeguards

Decision-making on NbS often involves conflicting beliefs, needs and
values of different stakeholders, which are likely to result in social
and environmental trade-offs [@Browder2019]. All trade-offs are
accompanied with a set of costs and benefits which may be subject to
change over the full NbS lifecycle and over time. Identifying trade-offs
at the project development stage and periodically reviewing them
throughout NbS projects is crucial to ensuring successful projects which
progress development agendas. In order to avoid potential adverse
impacts of an intervention, an understanding of trade-offs should inform
the establishment of social and biodiversity safeguards [@IUCN2020a;
@IUCN2020b].

## Social safeguards

A key function of NbS social safeguards is to ensure that necessary
trade-offs do not negatively impact the most disadvantaged of society
and to ensure that they are not denied access to the intervention's
benefits [@Seddon2021]. Potential costs and benefits of associated
trade-offs should be fully understood by all stakeholders and should
inform safeguards and relevant management actions.

## Biodiversity safeguards

Biodiversity safeguards are necessary to ensure the long-term properties
of ecosystem services are not exceeded [@Seddon2020]. Such safeguards
may include setting aside a certain area for protection or limiting the
timing of practices such as fishing.

All safeguards should be periodically reviewed to anticipate and avoid
any further adverse consequences. This is important considering that
inequity in trade-offs may change over time and not all stakeholders may
be equally affected.

In the event of trade-offs, mechanisms for resolution include grievance
mechanisms, consultation obligation, right to appeal, substantive
contracts, legal and regulatory provision.

# The issue of timescale

NbS have different timeframes for reaching full functionality and
delivering benefits [@WorldBank2017]. These need to be considered
when identifying, implementing and managing solutions. Many NbS take
time to implement and achieve full potential for service delivery
(longer than built solutions), which can be a factor of suitability for
implementation (see Figure 18.4.1). The issue of time is particularly
the case for restoration of badly degraded ecosystems. Other NbS have
seasonal functionality and may have higher functionality during growing
seasons and less in winter or dry seasons when plants are dormant.
However, not all projects require NbS to reach 100% of their potential
to meet baselines for service delivery [@Browder2019].

![](assets/Figure_18.4.1.png){width=100%}

**Figure 18.4.1:** It takes coral reefs at least 2-5 years to grow and
reproduce, and longer before they reach suitable size and maturity to
stabilise shorelines. By some estimates, it takes 4 decades for a
restored tropical forest to fully recover its structure and ecosystem
functionality [@Browder2019]. Photographs from Unsplash.

Ecosystems also change over time, which means that the services that an
NbS can provide will also vary over time [@Seddon2021; @Seddon2020].

NbS should be developed and implemented in a manner that is consistent
with the temporal dynamics and complexity of ecosystems, so that the
services provided by the ecosystem are sustainable and, as far as
possible, resilient to future change [@Cohen-Shacham2019;
@Browder2019]. Holistic approaches with a long, multi-year timeframe
have the best chance of success. 20-50 years is recommended to exploit
the full potential of NbS, in order to support uptake and scaling
[@WorldBank2017]. However, there may be a need to integrate NbS with
built infrastructure or other natural solutions until the chosen NbS
reaches full potential for service delivery.

# Governing and managing NbS to ensure long-term success

Managing NbS under shifting social, economic, political and
environmental conditions is challenging, particularly where land rights
and tenure are unclear [@Seddon2020]. Existing ecosystems in an
intervention area are often relied upon by locals to fulfil basic needs
(e.g. fuel, food, livelihoods), and so there is a need to balance
maintaining the NbS with meeting local needs in order to ensure that the
intervention doesn't undermine progress on the SDGs, and to ensure local
community use does not undermine the intervention.

Community management of projects is often necessary to ensure long-term
viability of the investment, whereby local and indigenous communities
steward the land and habitats being harnessed as infrastructure
solutions [@Naumann2011].

Practitioners implementing NbS should collaborate with, and gain support
from, local communities, and work in close collaboration with them in
maintaining and managing the NbS over the long-term
[@Cohen-Shacham2016; @Albert2020]. Civil society organisations can
be engaged to support local stakeholder engagement.

NbS are dynamic in nature and may be influenced by climate change and
other external factors over time. Consequently, as mentioned in
mini-lecture 18.1, to ensure sustainable performance of NbS over the
long-term, projects should be implemented with an adaptive management
approach, whereby management actions are adjusted as conditions change,
new information is gathered, and as the ecosystems respond
[@Cohen-Shacham2019; @Spearman&Dave2012]. Monitoring activities
during and after the NbS implementation will be needed to assess and
maintain its effectiveness and identify if further actions are necessary
[@Naumann2011]. They are also critical for growing an evidence base
and record lessons learned. Examples of monitoring activities are shown
in Table 18.4.2.

**Table 18.4.2:** Examples of aspects that should be monitored during
NbS projects using an active management approach [@IUCN2020b]

  Monitoring/governing            Description
  ------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Identify new risks to the NbS   Understand new risks that may undermine the NbS and whether new actions are required to ensure NbS success.
  Impacts of the NbS              Identify positive and negative social, environmental and economic consequences arising within and beyond the site. Understand if negative impacts require further mitigation.
  Effectiveness                   Monitor effectiveness of the NbS in addressing the societal challenge and other targets or objectives. If not, decide on follow-on actions.
  Development of the NbS          Monitor how the NbS and associated service functions are progressing (if according to plan, etc.,), identify opportunities to improve performance, understand response under changing conditions.

# Implementing and scaling-up successful NbS

There remains a need to contribute to new data and methods on NbS, to
support implementation and scaling-up [@IUCN2020b]. For example,
currently, there is relatively limited information on the effectiveness,
costs and benefits of NbS. There are knowledge gaps regarding the
performance of NbS, such as under extreme storm conditions or tsunamis
[@WorldBank2017]. Validated data from experiments or projects
implemented in the field is also often lacking.

It is important that the process of project design and implementation
captures, documents and makes available lessons learned to individuals
and stakeholders replicating the process. This should include
investigation of appropriate methods.

Development partners can help overcome knowledge gaps that act as
barriers to scaling NbS by investing in performance monitoring and
evaluating solution effectiveness and cost-effectiveness in order to
enhance the evidence base. This is important to help develop evidence
for and demonstration of importance of NbS under different scenarios and
in different contexts, and to support the development of industry
standards [@WorldBank2017].

Uptake of NbS can be facilitated by an open and transparent process to
determine performance standards. This would allow for standardised
quantification of effectiveness and comparison with conventional
engineering interventions.

Investors and other funders can support scaling-up through funding data
and method development, as well as funding assessments of ecosystem
dependencies.

Knowledge and awareness should be built through increased collaboration
and exchange of experience, resources (e.g. examples of feasibility
studies) and lessons learned across sectors.

The IUCN Global Standard on NbS [@IUCN2020a] and associated
guidelines [@IUCN2020b] provide a series of steps to support
practitioners and others in the field in planning, designing and
implementing successful NbS projects, and will support the
standardisation of approaches in order to help scale-up NbS globally.

# Summary

To ensure successful implementation and scaling-up of NbS projects, a
participatory approach is required, with particular focus on engaging
local and indigenous communities throughout the project lifecycle. Given
that NbS are likely to involve numerous different stakeholders,
trade-offs are likely, and so it is critical to develop robust social
safeguards to avoid adverse unintended consequences. The NbS should be
implemented and managed in line with the temporal dynamics of the
ecosystem, and take an adaptive management approach, whereby actions are
taken as the NbS develops to maintain long-term success. Lessons learned
should be recorded and shared to support scaling-up.
