---
title: Mini-Lecture 6.1 - An introduction to infrastructure strategies
---

# Metadata 

## Keywords

-   Strategic alternatives

-   Infrastructure strategy

-   Sustainable Infrastructure Vision

## Authors 

-   Lena Fuldauer

## Short description 

This mini-lecture introduces the concept of future infrastructure
strategies, lists examples of real-world strategies for different
sectors, as well as cross-sectoral strategies, and describes how
attribute information can be added to different strategies to enable
their comparison.

## Learning objectives 

-   Describe what infrastructure strategies are
-   Provide real world examples of infrastructure strategies for more
    than two sectors
-   Recall how to add attribute information to each strategy.

# Lecture content 

## What are infrastructure strategies?

This mini-lecture will introduce:

1.  What infrastructure strategies are

2.  Why these are useful

3.  Examples of real-world infrastructure strategies

4.  How to add attribute information to each strategy to enable their
    comparison

5.  How to bring these elements together.

Infrastructure strategies are visions of the future that include a set
of interventions or investments within or across infrastructure sectors
in order to achieve certain targets, such as climate or development
targets [@vanVuuren2011].

An infrastructure strategy is defined here as a portfolio of
interventions designed to meet a pre-defined set of performance targets.
A strategy can contain both demand- and capacity-side interventions and
both hard and soft interventions, for example grey and green
infrastructure investments, but also enabling environmental policy
interventions. Often, a combination of these different interventions is
necessary to achieve certain sustainability or climate targets. Taken
together, these interventions form 'strategies', and in essence are a
set of future investment plans.

## Importance of strategic planning for infrastructure systems

Strategic planning of infrastructure for sustainable development is a
grand challenge. To date, most infrastructure development projects have
failed to reach sustainable development outcomes, which can be
attributed to a number of reasons. These include a fragmented approach
to infrastructure planning, which typically lacks visioning for the
future [@Harris2016]. National decision-makers often focus on
short-term visions and immediate political agendas [@Hornsby2017].
Potential long-term impacts on environmental, social and economic
sustainability outcomes are generally of secondary concern, yet are
crucial for meeting the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and the
Paris Agreement.

One means by which to strategically consider long-term goals and agendas
in infrastructure planning is the development of various national
infrastructure strategies and then evaluating these strategies against
their performance on key targets that are aligned with the SDGs, the
Paris Agreement, or other global or national agreements [@Hall2016;
@Adshead2019; @Fuldauer2019]. These strategies embed different
visions of the future, and can represent certain views of how a
desirable (or undesirable) future infrastructure might look like. This
vision-driven process enables strategically assessing different
strategies and thereby understanding and visualising their performance
before decisions are made. Using evidence at the outset of the
infrastructure planning process can help depoliticise infrastructure
investments and provide a means by which to leverage infrastructure
decisions to meet climate and development targets. Further, such
strategic planning sets an agenda for design, implementation and
monitoring of strategies [@Sachs2019]. Ideally, the process of
infrastructure strategy planning and visioning can itself contribute to
sustainable development [@Fuldauer2019].

## Real-world infrastructure strategies in practice

Example strategies might include a development-aligned strategy, which
includes ambitious investments to meet certain SDG, climate-, or other
global or national targets. A further strategy might include a
business--as--usual strategy, thereby assuming similar infrastructure
investments to those in the past. A pipeline strategy might include
different investments as proposed in national documents or by national
stakeholders. An inaction strategy -- comprised of no further
investments -- can be used as a comparison or baseline strategy.

Previous country-specific assessments have developed infrastructure
strategies for specific sectors, such as the waste sector
[@Fuldauer2019] or across different sectors [@Adshead2019;
@Adshead2021; @Ives2019].

Sector-specific infrastructure strategies in the waste sector, for
example, include a 'circular-economy' strategy. This strategy envisions
that waste prevention, re-use and recycling potentials are met by strong
waste reduction incentives, with the aim of meeting waste-specific SDG
targets. This strategy is comprised of a set of ambitious i) demand-side
options, such as a re-use centre for specific waste sources ii)
supply-side options, such as new recycling stations and home composting
and iii) policy options, such as a reduction in the harbour tax. A
further strategy, the 'technology-led' strategy, reflects another vision
of the future of waste, which includes investments into building new
recycling infrastructure. These two different strategies are compared to
an 'inaction' strategy, which assumes no further investment in waste
management [@Fuldauer2019] (see Figure 6.1.1).

![](media/image1.png "Inserting image..."){width="6.390109361329833in"
height="5.34375in"}**Figure 6.1.1:** Waste infrastructure strategies in
Curaçao, by waste treated [@Fuldauer2019].

Infrastructure strategies across sectors (energy, water, waste,
wastewater) include a 'national sustainability strategy', a
'business-as-usual\' and an 'inaction' strategy [@Adshead2021], which
are made up of different interventions (see Figure 6.1.2).

**Figure 6.1.2:** Comparison of infrastructure strategy portfolios for
current/inaction, business‐as‐usual, and national sustainability
strategy for (a) electricity (b) water supply (c) wastewater and (d)
solid waste [@Adshead2021].

## Strategy attributes to enable comparison

Each intervention under each strategy, whether a sector-specific or
cross-sectoral one, must be assigned certain attributes to enable
strategy comparison. In Figure 6.1.1, we have seen the use of the
attribute 'waste treated by type' to compare different strategies. For
cross-sectoral strategies, it is critical to collect attribute data that
is consistent and can be applied across sectors. This includes, for
example, cost attributes, capacity margin attributes, or annual
emissions (see Figure 6.1.3 for an example of a comparison of emissions
across strategies).

![](media/image3.png){width="6.5in" height="4.319024496937883in"}

**Figure 6.1.3:** Emissions by sector compared to a 2010 baseline,
showing a business‐as‐usual case, and reductions attributed to emissions
targets modelled in the electricity and waste sectors [@Adshead2021].

## Conclusion

In this lecture, we identified that meeting global or national targets
requires strategic planning of new investments and interventions. To
date, most decisions on infrastructure projects have been driven by
short term visions and political priorities. Infrastructure strategies
are portfolios of interventions designed to meet a pre-defined set of
performance targets. Developing and comparing various strategies can
help provide evidence to decision-makers on which investments to
prioritise, thereby depoliticising infrastructure decisions. A well
justified infrastructure strategy can further increase confidence that
investments will yield returns while being consistent with
environmental, economic, and social commitments [@Adshead2021].
Infrastructure strategies can focus on a specific sector, or include
cross-sectoral investments and commitments. Strategies are made up of a
set of specific interventions or investments, which are assigned a
number of comparable attributes, such as costs, carbon, capacity or
other service provision information. Using strategies in infrastructure
planning, informed by quantified attributes, can help governments and
decision-makers map out pathways towards sustainability, climate
resilience and other global goals.
