---
title: Mini-Lecture 6.2 -- Methods to develop infrastructure strategies
keywords:
-   Infrastructure strategy development
-   Participatory methods
-   Content analysis
authors:
-   Lena Fuldauer
---

This mini-lecture introduces different methods to develop infrastructure
strategies and outlines each method in more detail. These include:

-   Participatory methods and co-creating infrastructure strategies
    together with stakeholders
-   Content analysis which involves reviewing published documents on
    confirmed, proposed or potential options
-   Hybrid methods.

# Learning objectives

-   Provide examples of different methods to develop infrastructure
    strategies
-   Describe the differences between foresight, backcasting methods and
    content analyses.

# An overview of methods to develop infrastructure strategies

A traditional means by which to assess and plan for the future is
scenario planning.

Scenario planning typically aims to develop overall visions of future
systems states, with various future conditions and policy assumptions
and pathways towards each version, thereby embracing the concept of
multiple possible futures [@Bradfield2005].

These scenarios are often described as narratives of possible paths into
the future, and can be differentiated into three classes:

1.  Probable scenarios (what is likely to happen)
2.  Possible scenarios (what could happen)
3.  Normative scenarios (what should happen) [@Borjeson2006].

Within these various scenario generation exercises, it is useful to
distinguish between endogenous (incorporating various
policy/intervention options) and exogenous scenarios (outside of the
control of actors) [@Hickford2015]. Endogenous t scenarios include
strategies of alternative futures, mapping a 'possibility space', whilst
exogenous scenarios include population, economy or climate scenarios.

Exogenous scenarios are useful in exploring uncertainties with respect
to future socio-economic or climate scenarios (as covered in lecture
block 4).

Here we focus on the endogenous scenario generation literature to
identify sets of infrastructure interventions, which can be combined
into infrastructure strategies.

This mini-lecture will explore how to use (1) foresight methods, (2)
strategic backcasting, or (3) content analysis to generate
infrastructure strategies, and finally (4) reflect on using hybrid
methods.

# Foresight methods

Foresight methods, such as Delphi methods, were first developed in the 1950s, and seek agreement on future trends from a wide range of experts [@Gordon1964]. These experts respond to sets of questions, review answers and revise their views in an iterative fashion. Answers are then presented anonymously to reduce the subjectivity of more influential group members [@Lempert2009].
Delphi methods can be used to generate infrastructure strategies, by inviting leaders from different sectors, including government, business, science, technology or academia, to come together in workshops or focus groups to exchange views on future developments and decide on certain interventions [@Georghiou2008]. Consensus is typically the main objective in most foresight methods.

![](assets/Figure_6.2.1.png){width=100%}

**Figure 6.2.1**: Overview of foresight method: working from a present state and envisioning different strategies into the future.

# Strategic backcasting

In the development of preferred future options, backcasting methods can
be used.

The backcasting method works backwards from a particular normative
vision to present interventions by visioning futures and developing
agendas or policy measures to achieve the vision. This method -- similar
to foresight methods -- is a participatory means by which different
stakeholders can come together to develop infrastructure strategies
[@Fuldauer2019].

Research has argued that effective backcasting studies can bridge the
gap between research and action, by involving various stakeholders to
envision desirable futures, collecting data and generating strategies,
thereby helping to overcome the implementation gap [@Banister2013].

In the context of infrastructure strategy generation, strategic
backcasting can be used by inviting various stakeholders to work
backwards from national or global targets, such as development or
climate targets, and identify sets of interventions (then grouped in
strategies) to reach these targets. Unlike in most foresight studies,
consensus is not one of the main objectives of backcasting. Instead, the
aim of the backcasting process is to group different investment under
contrasting visions, which allows the portfolio of strategies to be
diversified.

![](assets/Figure_6.2.2.png){width=100%}

**Figure 6.2.2**: Overview of backcasting method: working from a future state and envisioning different strategies to achieve it.

# Content analysis

Content analysis is another means by which to identify infrastructure
interventions, which can be grouped and categorised into different
strategies.

National policy documents, feasibility studies, infrastructure sector
reports or regional studies and targets can be used to identify
interventions or policies considered feasible. These interventions can
be classified according to their likelihood of implementation:
confirmed, proposed, or potential [@Adshead2021].

Some interventions or policies might already by confirmed in certain
policy documents or by different funders. Other interventions may be
proposed in planning documents or national/regional reports. Yet other
interventions may neither be confirmed nor proposed by national policy
documents of feasibility studies, but could instead by identified
through content analysis at the regional level. This could include
adopting interventions that have been confirmed or proposed in similar
or neighbouring countries, and which can provide examples of
interventions not otherwise accounted for in existing reports or
documents.

# Hybrid methods

Having identified sets of interventions through either participatory
forecasting/ backcasting or through content analysis methods, these
interventions can then be organised by broader categories of
infrastructure system transformations, such as behavioural change,
system efficiencies, capacity investments, etc. [@Otto2016].
Alternatively, these interventions can also be organised around global
development or climate outcomes [@Adshead2021] or sets of normative
visions (e.g. circular economy; technology-led focus
[@Fuldauer2019]). This step of reorganising specific interventions is
most useful when interventions have been identified through foresight or
content-analysis methods, as these typically lack specific
vision-setting at the outset of the process. Conversely, backcasting
methods can be used strategically to develop strategies, which are then
assigned sets of infrastructure interventions.

The above summary of different methods to develop infrastructure
strategies points to the usefulness of using hybrid methods.
Participatory methods such as backcasting can be used to develop the
classifications of infrastructure strategies in the first place (such as
behavioural change, system efficiencies, development-aligned
strategies). Participatory methods can then be combined with content
analysis methods to identify lists of confirmed, proposed or potential
interventions under each of the proposed infrastructure strategies.

The process of infrastructure strategy generation can be repeated for
each sector, or explicitly be applied to consider cross-sectoral
infrastructure strategies. Typically, various infrastructure strategies
are compared to the case of 'inaction'. 'Inaction' is not strictly a
strategy but serves as a counterfactual to understand the extent of
infrastructure performance decline in the case of inaction with respect
to interventions, and increasing demand for infrastructure services.

# Summary

This lecture introduced the concept of endogenous infrastructure
strategy development. Participatory forecasting, backcasting or content
analysis methods can be used to develop various infrastructure
interventions, which can be grouped under certain infrastructure
strategies. Hybrid approaches may use backcasting to develop
infrastructure strategies, and further use content analysis in
combination with forecasting to identify sets of interventions or
policies under these strategies.
