---
title: Mini-Lecture 5.3 - Integrating climate and development targets in
  infrastructure planning
---



keywords:

-   Climate-compatible development

-   Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)

-   Mitigation

authors:

-   Dan Adshead

---

This lecture looks beyond the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) at
how infrastructure planning can be further shaped by climate change
targets through the Paris Agreement. While this draws on much of the
material from Lecture block 2, it presents emerging research on the
alignment of these two agendas in the run-up to the next Conference of
the Parties (COP) as countries aim to set a vision for climate and
development.

# Learning objectives

-   To describe the policy relevance of the concept of
    'climate-compatible development'

-   To relate methods by which researchers have attempted to understand
    interactions between climate and development targets in policy
    documents.



# Introduction

The Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) provide a formalised
mechanism for countries to communicate their commitments to maintaining
climate change to under 2° C. Although climate targets are reflected in
SDG 13 (*Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts*),
actions to mitigate greenhouse gases can also contribute to a country's
wider development targets, for example by supporting access to clean
energy, reducing health effects of indoor and outdoor air pollution, and
promoting reforestation efforts that protect the natural environment
[@Urge-Vorsatz2014; @FusoNerini2019]. Indirect impacts of these
types of actions extend widely across the SDGs, including through
poverty reduction, equality, and education. National infrastructure and
land use planning will encompass the vast majority of these actions. The
challenge is: how can climate and development targets be harmonised
within a common framework which responds to specific challenges faced in
each country?

This lecture will explore in more depth the range of climate actions and
targets used throughout the NDCs and the degree to which these
commitments link with SDG targets. It will provide an indication of the
level of ambition shown by countries in their mitigation commitments.
Finally, it will consider ways in which identified country-specific
challenges can be used to define targets as part of a sustainable
infrastructure strategy.

# Setting the scene: opportunities for climate and development coordination

    The Paris Agreement’s ‘ambition mechanism’ stipulates that the 195 countries party to the agreement are expected to update and communicate their pledges (NDCs) to further reduce greenhouse gas emissions on a five-year basis and strengthen their mitigation and adaptation responses to climate change [@UNFCCC2015]. Meanwhile, national governments must continue to address development challenges and improve upon performance across a range of social, economic, and environmental outcomes to achieve the 2030 Agenda (SDGs). This provides a great opportunity for policy integration: by requiring each party to draft its commitments in the form of Nationally Determined Contributions, the Paris Agreement offers a formalised mechanism through which to assess and compare countries’ approaches to integrating mitigation and national development goals, specifically those set according to the SDG framework [@Adshead2021a].
    While the world’s highest emitters are generally advanced economies or large, industrialised powerhouses such as China and India, non-Annex countries, which include most countries from the developing world, are not legally bound to reduce emissions by the agreement. This creates an opportunity to incentivise mitigation action by linking it directly to associated development outcomes which will be of interest to policymakers [@Adshead2021a].
    The challenges of defining a framework for merging climate change mitigation – and adaptation – actions with development outcomes suited to a wide range of global contexts has brought about the concept of ‘climate-compatible development’ (Figure 5.3.1) [@Mitchell2010], which has provided an appealing triple-win framework for the assessment of development projects across multiple sectors [@Suckall2015; @England2018]. It has, however, faced critiques and calls for reconceptualisation in order to better align the mitigation and development agendas [@Janetos2012; @Winkler2015].

    Figure 5.3.1: The ‘climate-compatible development’ framework, linking adaptation, mitigation, and development strategies [@Mitchell2010]

# Identifying the infrastructure link between SDGs and NDCs

Previous initiatives have examined the points of intersection between
the Paris Agreement and the SDGs.

By conducting key word searches, discourse analysis, and extracting and
coding pledged climate activities, researchers can get a sense of
alignment between the two agendas -- although these are largely
expressed qualitatively [@Northrop2016; @Dzebo2019]. However, this
allows avenues for policy coherence to be explored at the country level
[@Nguyen2018]. Furthermore, priority areas for thematic coherence
between the two agendas, such as energy efficiency, sustainable forest
management, and sustainable agriculture, can be identified
[@Janetschek2020], as can those that are under-prioritised in NDC
activities [@Dickin2018]. Figure 5.3.2 indicates the distribution of
NDC activities in relation to all 17 SDGs.

**Figure 5.3.2:** Distribution of NDC activities in relation to the
Sustainable Development Goals [@Dzebo2019]

In Figure 5.3.3, we see that this alignment between the NDCs and SDGs is
widespread, particularly in those targets encompassing infrastructure
sectors (e.g. 6, 7, 9, 11), when we consider all targets, actions,
policy measures, and needs highlighted in countries' NDCs, including the
adaptation components.

![](media/image3.png){width="0.5979166666666667in"
height="0.5979166666666667in"}![](media/image4.png){width="0.5972222222222222in"
height="0.5972222222222222in"}![](media/image5.png){width="0.5972222222222222in"
height="0.5972222222222222in"}![](media/image6.tiff){width="3.220538057742782in"
height="2.251968503937008in"}![A map of the world Description
automatically generated](media/image7.tiff){width="3.208772965879265in"
height="2.251968503937008in"}

![](media/image8.png){width="0.5979166666666667in"
height="0.5979166666666667in"}![Map Description automatically
generated](media/image9.tiff){width="3.2256102362204726in"
height="2.2344936570428695in"}![Map Description automatically
generated](media/image10.tiff){width="3.232283464566929in"
height="2.2283464566929134in"}

**Figure 5.3.3:** Linkages between NDCs and infrastructure-focused SDGs
[@ClimateWatchData2020]

While these studies provide a basis for assessing general alignment
between these two agendas, they do not go as far as to address
countries' SDG achievement gaps and their potential elimination through
specific sectoral actions or targets [@Adshead2021a]. By focusing on
the mitigation component of climate targets, we can aim to narrow down
specific actions that might be incorporated as part of an infrastructure
strategy to fill these gaps.

# Global mitigation ambition in infrastructure

While most countries commit to a certain level of emissions reduction in
their NDCs, which may be presented by sector, these commitments must be
backed up by proposed policy actions if they are to be effective.

Most countries have signalled intentions to boost the ambition of their
NDCs (see Lecture block 2). Despite this, many countries have faced
barriers due to financial considerations, identification of appropriate
policy options, and political priorities [@VanTilburg2018]. This
includes many less-developed countries, which have a lot to gain in
terms of sustainable development benefits from a shift to a low carbon
economy. Given this, it seems that the commitments currently pledged by
many countries do not fully align with their development needs.

Levels of commitment to mitigation action vary across infrastructure and
land use sectors, as demonstrated in the first round of NDCs submitted
by most of the world's countries. A large number of these contain
qualitative commitments only, and many contain no sectoral targets at
all, including at least half of NDCs for the transport, waste,
agriculture, and forestry sectors [@Adshead2021a].

Some patterns emerge here, which can be tied back to context-specific
challenges presented in mini-lecture 1.4. Ambitious renewables targets
are common in small island countries where energy independence will be
crucial to future economic security. Transport-specific planning is more
often evident in countries with rapidly urbanising populations. Avoiding
deforestation and focusing on reforestation efforts is common in the
tropics as well as arid countries where desertification is a threat.
Many countries in Africa and Asia emphasise mitigation measures in
agriculture, which accounts for a large share of national income
[@Adshead2021a].

# 

# A closer alignment of climate and development targets in infrastructure planning

In the current NDC landscape, many countries are incentivised to justify
lower levels of ambition -- due to low historical emissions -- rather
than to pursue enhanced benefits through stronger commitments
[@MillsNovoa2019]. With a close alignment of the SDG and NDC
decision-making frameworks, these policy mechanisms can be set up using
a more evidence-based approach that operationalises NDC commitments to
deliver on development benefits tailored to each specific country
context.

For example, @Adshead2021a provides a means of identifying specific
indicators that are linked to SDG target achievement -- as in
mini-lecture 5.2 -- but which can also define actions taken as part of a
climate mitigation strategy. From this, we can quantify progress on SDG
targets and sustainability dimensions described in terms of renewable
energy share, as well as the emissions reductions enabled by the action.

Such a framework seeks alignment and synergies between climate pathways
and development goals, including non-climate dimensions, with
implications for infrastructure planners. While recognising the wide
potential for development co-benefits, it defines the need for specific
mitigation targets and actions based on existing outcomes and gaps. In
addition, policymakers can take a contextualised approach to assessing
the impacts of specific NDC actions according to the challenges faced in
their countries. This type of analysis produces more concrete proposals
for action [@Adshead2021a].

# Summary

This lecture has introduced the importance of methods that draw on the
'climate-compatible development' framework. It has assessed ways in
which researchers look to consolidate climate and development targets in
national policy documents. Within the NDCs, current ambition as regards
mitigation action in infrastructure and land use policy has been
described, with a call for a framework that better integrates these two
areas to bring about concrete policy actions.
