---
title: Mini-Lecture 4.2 - Infrastructure demand across sectors
---

# Metadata

## Keywords

-   Energy and transportation demand

-   Water demand

-   Waste management demand

## Authors

-   Orlando Roman

## Short description

In this mini-lecture we describe important features of future demand for
four main infrastructure sectors: energy, transportation, water and
solid waste.

## Learning objectives

-   Recognise the current state of infrastructure demand across
    different sectors
-   Explain the main trends and challenges in future infrastructure
    demand across different sectors.

# Lecture content

## Energy demand

    Now, we will take a first look at demand challenges across different infrastructure sectors. Energy is an input in almost all goods and services we need, starting with the production of food, through heating, cooking, lighting, communications and transportation [@Baruah2016]. Our current energy system is also one of the main factors of climate change; therefore, the future challenges of meeting the energy demand sustainably are huge and considered in the Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 7 “Affordable and Clean Energy”.
    The growing level of industrialisation, technological advancement and population growth will increase demand and challenge the global energy systems. This increase will be more notorious in developing economies throughout the first stages of industrialisation. For instance, some energy forecasts predicted that energy consumption in non-OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) countries will increase by 41% between 2015 and 2040, in contrast to a 9% increase in OECD countries [@EIA2017]. Figure 4.3.1 shows the disaggregated demand of non-OECD consumption, with Asia being the region with the highest increase.

    Fig. 4.2.1: Forecasted Non-OECD energy consumption [@EIA2017]
    Looking to the near future, the electrification of transport is expected to restructure the global energy demand, reducing fossil fuel consumption and pushing electricity demand even further. On the other hand, environmental consciousness can potentially reduce our energy consumption through the selection of more efficient appliances or renewable energy sources. In this respect, there are a variety of demand interventions and regulations that can be used, which will be reviewed in Lecture 6.

## Transportation demand

    Transportation systems can comprise roads, railways, airports, ports, and all related infrastructure. The vehicles that transit on these networks are not part of the infrastructure system, but they are crucial elements impacting on its performance. For example, carbon emissions of the system depend on vehicles’ fuel type and consumption [@Blainey2016]. 
    Some transportation networks are usually congested at peak hours due to commuting travel within a city, and between the city and other suburban settlements. To reduce this congestion, transportation managers try to improve the efficiency of the system by using better scheduling of public transport or policies such as road pricing. However, more often than not, expansion of the transportation infrastructure is required to serve the increasing demand. One of the features of transportation systems is the so-called phenomenon of induced demand, which is the auto-generated demand produced by the capacity expansion [@Cervero2002].
    Transportation demand is expected to increase due to population growth and the need for more interconnected urban centres. Some trends can challenge and modify this demand, such as the potential use of automated vehicles or an increase in working from home. On the other hand, the demand for different transportation modes might change towards more sustainable mobility (e.g. bikes) or public transport if the adequate incentives are given in the planning process. Figure 4.3.2 shows a forecast of different types of transportation towards 2050. It can be seen that most of the increase will be in non-OECD countries.

    Fig. 4.2.2: Demand for passenger transport by type [@ITF2019]

## Water demand

Water use has been increasing worldwide at a rate of 1% annually since
the 1980s, driven by population growth, socio-economic development and
consumption patterns [@UNESCO2019]. This global demand is expected to
grow by 20% to 30% until 2050 in comparison with current water use
[@Burek2016].

Future trends will challenge our ability to provide safe water,
particularly considering that we haven't even been able to meet current
water demand. Approximately four billion people experience severe water
scarcity at least one month of the year [@Mekonnen2012], two billion
do not have access to safely-managed drinking water and 785 million lack
basic services [@WHO2019].

Future options to meet water demand in the developing world include
making the system more efficient, for example, by reducing water losses,
increasing the reuse, and recycling wastewater. Developing countries
have estimated water losses of about 40% to 50%, mainly due to physical
deterioration and unauthorised connections [@Kingdom2006]. On the
other hand, developed countries are increasingly using tertiary
treatment of wastewater, reducing pollution and producing a new form of
water supply.

The supply side of water will also be challenged by climate change.
Figure 4.3.3 shows the expected change in net precipitation by 2050.
While an increment in precipitation will increase the risk of flooding
and erosion, a decrease will reduce our ability to supply water.

![](media/image3.png){width="6.533919510061242in"
height="3.107595144356955in"}

**Fig. 4.2.3:** Change in net precipitation, 2010--2050 [@UNESCO2019]

## Solid waste demand

    We produce solid waste from our daily activities and a poor waste management can contaminate our environment and oceans and can cause respiratory problems and spread diseases. Solid waste management is typically provided at the municipality level, and consists of collection, transfer stations, processing facilities, landfills and incinerators [@Watson2016]. Current waste management policies prioritise a more circular economy approach by reusing, recycling and recovering waste based on the widespread waste hierarchy which was included in SDG 12 “Responsible Consumption and Production” [@Pires2019]. Figure 4.2.4 shows this waste hierarchy in which different waste management options are prioritised according to their degree of sustainability. Prevention is considered the most preferred option while disposal is the least preferred.

**Fig. 4.2.4:** Waste Hierarchy [@Bugge2019]

However, our waste management systems still depend on landfills, given
the huge amount of waste disposed in previous decades and the challenge
of reusing, recycling and recovering most of our waste stream. This is
more profound in low-income countries in which 93% of waste is dumped
[@Kaza2018] given that they lack waste treatment processes and good
segregation systems. Current technologies are recovering resources and
energy (methane) from landfills, helping to reduce the need for raw
materials.

Waste generation is correlated with economic development, as shown in
Figure 4.2.5, therefore it's not surprising that waste generation in low
and middle-income countries is expected to increase by 40% by 2050
[@Kaza2018]. On the other hand, future waste management demand will
probably entail more electronic and chemical waste, which needs to be
managed carefully by using proper treatment and hazardous disposal
facilities.

![](media/image5.png){width="6.553846237970253in"
height="3.4145188101487314in"}

**Fig. 4.2.5:** Waste Generation per capita (kg) [@Kaza2018]

## Summary

In this mini-lecture we have explored the differences between four of
the main important infrastructure sectors in terms of their future
demand. We also reviewed current states of demand and highlighted how
current challenges can persist or increase into the future. It is
important to note that these four infrastructure sectors will not
necessarily be the most important in every location, for instance,
digital communications are now a critical sector for international
development.

Other contexts might consider irrigation (e.g. agriculture-based
economies) or ports (e.g. islands) as vital infrastructure systems that
need special attention. Furthermore, some countries are including health
and educational services in their infrastructure plans, which imply
further differing challenges and approaches.

It's important to note that different sectors have different demand
trends so different strategies might apply. On the other hand, most of
the sectors have interdependencies between them, so collaborative plans
and system-of-systems thinking will provide great value for
infrastructure planners.
