---
title: Mini-Lecture 4.3 - Determining main infrastructure drivers
keywords:
-   Population growth
-   Per capita consumption
-   Seasonal Effects
authors:
-   Orlando Roman
---

## Short description

This mini-lecture will continue exploring the main infrastructure
drivers and their specific features. It will also serve as a guide to
select different drivers according to different case study applications.

## Learning objectives

-   List different infrastructure drivers that might be considered for
    demand forecasting
-   Describe how different contexts might require a different set of
    demand drivers.

# Lecture content

## Key considerations

This mini-lecture will continue exploring the main infrastructure
drivers and some of their specific features. It is important to note
that different cases and applications will need different considerations
of drivers, narratives and factors. Complementary to future scenarios, a
detailed approach to the construction of infrastructure strategies will
be shown in Lecture 6.

As we have seen with the example of Shared Socio-economic Pathways
(SSPs), the nature of the future narratives we want to explore are
crucial in the development of forecasts. In its simplest form, we can
assume that current consumption patterns will remain unchanged in the
future and infrastructure demand will be driven only by population
growth. The complexity of the estimation increases when we assume
long-term trends on economic development, urbanisation and demographics.
This entails not only an interdependent analysis of infrastructure and
the economy, but potentially an explicit spatial analysis for the urban
development driver.

The considered time span is also of importance, given that the more
distant the future, the higher the uncertainty. For instance, a
projection of a couple of decades in the future might hold some
assumptions of current technologies and patterns. However, a forecast
toward the end of the century might need assumptions about disruptive
technological and socio-economic changes that can fundamentally
restructure our relationship with infrastructure services.

## Population trends

As we have seen in previous mini-lectures, population is one of the main
drivers of future infrastructure demand [@Thoung2016]. Population
forecasts can be typically found in national or regional statistics
authorities with different levels of detail and features. Here, we will
provide a detailed review on one high-quality worldwide forecast by the
United Nations that can be used for the development of policies and
planning.

The United Nations regularly publishes World Population Prospects
[@UNDESA2019], with detailed population estimations. The document
provides estimations for 235 countries by using two demographic trends:
population growth and population ageing. One of the main features of
this publication is that it brings several Population Scenarios
including low, medium and high variants, and different narratives such
as "constant fertility", "instant replacement", "zero migration",
"constant mortality" and "no change". In this way, it provides a broad
range of options for selecting the scenarios based on fertility,
mortality and migration considerations. Figure 4.2.1 shows this broad
range of scenarios for the population of Ghana by 2050.

![](media/image1.png){width="6.445254811898513in"
height="3.5986876640419947in"}

**Figure 4.3.1:** Population Forecasting for Ghana under different
scenarios (based on data from @UNDESA2019)

Furthermore, the World Population Prospects provides probabilistic
estimations including prediction intervals that can help with
uncertainty quantification and detailed analysis for infrastructure
planning.

## Per capita consumption rates and seasonal effects

Based on the analysis of population trends, the next step is to estimate
the infrastructure services that will be needed, which is normally done
on a per capita basis. Per capita consumption rates can be found in the
literature, policy documents and utilitiesÂ´ reports, or can be discussed
with policy makers according to their visions and expectations to the
future. Some useful per capita consumption rates can be found, for
example, in the World Bank Development indicators [@WorldBank2012]
for different countries and regions about energy and water consumption.
These consumption rates, however, might change with the socio-economic
development of the region [@Thoung2016].

One simple way of forecasting infrastructure demand is by doing annual
aggregates and looking at year-over-year changes. However, our needs,
and consequently infrastructure demand, is not uniform throughout the
four seasons of a calendar year. For instance, in Europe, heating needs
increase over the northern-hemisphere winter, putting pressure on the
energy system. While our infrastructure should provide services over the
whole year, it is particularly important to provide a reliable service
when it's needed the most. Other examples are seasonal tourism, which is
an important demand factor in small islands, and the equilibrium between
water demand and supply that can be under stress throughout the dry
season.

Figure 4.3.2 shows the seasonal changes of energy demand for the UK
compared with the mean demand along the year. This seasonal pattern
persists in the projections of the future.

![The increasing impact of weather on electricity supply and demand -
ScienceDirect](media/image2.jpg){width="3.91875in"
height="3.7284722222222224in"}

**Figure 4.3.2:** Seasonal energy demand in the UK [@Staffell2018]

## Spatially distributed demand

    Another simplification in infrastructure forecasting is to develop national aggregates for central planning purposes. However, the spatial distribution of infrastructure needs might be crucial for several applications. This is clearer with the development of mega urban centres in which infrastructure demand is high. On the other hand, when looking into the future, the potential rural-urban migration, or the development of satellite urban settlements, play a role in how we perform our infrastructure planning.
    Scenario narratives might also influence the spatial distribution of demand. For instance, one explored scenario might be the expansion of current urban centres while a different scenario might assume a redistribution of development along semi-urban and rural areas.
    Figure 4.3.3 shows how different regions bring different changes in population by 2040 in the Nordic countries. These different spatial changes will also bring different challenges for the coverage that our distribution networks need to reach. While an expansion on the national electricity transmission network is not a major issue, other more regional-dependent infrastructures such as water and waste will need a more granular analysis of the future local and regional needs.

**Figure 4.3.3:** Spatial population change in Nordic municipalities by
2040 [@Gassen2019]

## Other chronic effects and climate change

    Planning methods under uncertainty have developed extensively during the last decades, mainly due to the critical importance of climate change for our future [@Lempert2010] [@Haasnoot2013]. Alongside the importance of adaptation and mitigation, climate change might have an impact on our ability to meet infrastructure demand.
    Firstly, climate change can modify our consumption patterns in terms of heating, cooling and demand for services [@Clarke2018]. It will certainly increase the seasonal variability of demand and have major impacts on our supply systems. For instance, changes in temperature, wind and rainfall patterns will affect the functioning of renewable energy (solar and wind) and water supplies [@Urich2014] (as seen in mini-lecture 4.2).
    Another chronic effect that might be important for infrastructure planning is the inevitable ageing of infrastructure assets, or the slow deterioration of our systems, which can be mitigated by good maintenance programmes. Also, strong demographic changes (increasing elderly population and variation in gender profiles) can play a role in modified consumption patterns into the future. In summary, different contexts might require a different set of drivers.

## Summary

In this mini-lecture we explored in more detail some infrastructure
demand drivers such as population growth and per capita consumption
rates. We also comment on seasonal effects and spatially distributed
demand as important features to take into account in different contexts.
