---
title: Mini-Lecture 4.4 -- Infrastructure demand forecasts in practice
---

# Metadata

## Keywords

-   Population growth

-   Socio-economic development

-   Infrastructure demand

## Authors

-   Orlando Roman

## Short description

This mini-lecture shows four practical examples of demand forecasting
applications in Curaçao, Saint Lucia, Palestine and Ghana. These case
studies provide examples of forecasting estimation based on population
growth, tourism and economic development.

## Learning objectives

-   Describe forecast estimation for different contexts
-   Identify differences in future demand across infrastructure sectors
    in practice.

# Lecture content

## Overview of demand projections in practice

This mini-lecture will showcase different applications of the National
Infrastructure Systems MODel -- International (NISMOD-Int) for demand
forecasting. Infrastructure demand forecasting was used in a range of
international contexts including Curaçao, Saint Lucia, Palestine, Ghana
and others. The specific details and differences between countries will
arise by describing the rationale and the process followed in each of
these cases. As explained in previous mini-lectures, different contexts
require different infrastructure drivers, which also depend on
stakeholder visions and expectations.

The cases studied here cover the aforementioned four countries and three
infrastructure sectors: waste, electricity and water. Additionally,
infrastructure needs are also discussed in terms of future performance
of current systems and why they need to be restructured.

## Waste generation projections for Curaçao

    For the waste sector in Curaçao, population, tourism and economic growth were used as future demand drivers. Expected waste generation for population and tourists were merged to construct low, moderate and high waste generation scenarios, as shown in Figure 4.4.1. The projections show a broad range of waste generation by 2050, varying between 260 and 375 thousand tonnes per year.

    Figure 4.4.1: Waste Generation Projections for Curaçao [@Fuldauer2019]
    Waste management in Curaçao currently depends heavily on landfills, which are due to run out of capacity in the near future. Figure 4.4.2 shows that, at the current rate of waste generation, and without other interventions, landfills will be full by 2030. Therefore, waste management in the future will need new options, such as waste treatment and recycling plants, waste reduction programmes and as the last option (following the waste hierarchy described in mini-lecture 4.2), new landfills for final disposal.

    Figure 4.4.2: Waste demand and current supply [@Adshead2018]

## Electricity demand in Saint Lucia

In the Saint Lucia case study, energy demand was also estimated based on
population and tourism growth, as in Curaçao. Figure 4.4.3 shows three
projections to 2050 for cruise-ship tourists, stay-over tourists and the
residential population. Not only do the numbers vary but also the
trajectories (i.e. population can increase or decrease by 2050).

![](media/image3.png){width="3.192720909886264in"
height="3.8867924321959757in"}

**Figure 4.4.3:** Residential and peak tourism scenarios
[@Adshead2020]

Per capita consumption rates in the island were estimated with current
consumption. Residents consume on average 1.4 MWh/resident/year and
0.2KW/resident at peak time. Tourists consume 12.2 MWh/tourist/year and
1.9KW/tourist over the peak period, which is about 10 times the
residential consumption. Therefore, seasonal tourism is an important
driver when it comes to future infrastructure planning. A comparison of
residential consumption rates for Caribbean small island states (3.0
MWh/resident/year) and OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development) countries (7.7 MWh/resident/year) [@WorldBank2014]
suggests that per capita consumption rates in Saint Lucia might increase
alongside economic development.

Figure 4.4.4 shows the moderate demand projection in comparison with
current diesel and renewables supply. Current diesel has enough capacity
to attend future demand, however the commitment to reduce carbon
emissions, the high cost of diesel and the dependence on this fossil
fuel (which is imported), call for a restructuring of the system and the
development of new energy supply options.

![](media/image4.png){width="6.278495188101488in"
height="3.111111111111111in"}

**Figure 4.4.4:** Future energy needs for a moderate scenario
[@Adshead2020]

## Combining socio-economic projections and expectations in Palestine

For a Fast Track Analysis of infrastructure provision in Palestine
[@Ives2018], population change and economic development were used as
the drivers of future scenarios.

Population forecasts for Palestine were developed by combining
population growth expected for both Gaza and the West Bank. The sum of
these two projections resulted in a range of between 10.7 and 16.3
million people by 2050, for the High and Low scenarios, respectively
(Figure 4.4.5). These projections are equivalent to average annual
growth rates of 2.3% and 3.6%, respectively, which are in line with the
average growth rate of 2.6% for Palestine between 2007 and 2016
[@Ives2018].

![](media/image5.png){width="5.786215004374453in"
height="3.5660378390201224in"}

**Figure 4.4.5:** Population projections for Palestine [@Ives2018]

Economic forecasts were also developed for Palestine for the baseline
economic scenario, the optimistic scenario and the pessimistic scenario
by using annual GDP growth rates of 3.5%, 5.5% and 1.5%, respectively
[@Ives2018]. As shown in Figure 4.4.6, three socio-economic scenarios
were created: (1) "balanced prosperity" by combining the low population
growth with the optimistic economic scenario, (2) "central" by combining
the central population growth and the baseline economic scenario, and
(3) "unstable adversity" by combining the high population growth and the
pessimistic economic scenario.

![](media/image6.png){width="6.291346237970254in"
height="3.4245286526684167in"}

**Figure 4.4.6:** Economic projections for Palestine [@Ives2018]

Figure 4.4.7 shows water demand projections for low, central and high
population scenarios. In this case, two sets of projections are
presented, the first one by using current consumption ratios (dotted
lines) and a second one by using a World Health Organization recommended
ratio of 100 litres/capita/day (solid lines). In this way, the
expectation to achieve certain development indicators can be established
in the future projections of infrastructure demand.

![](media/image7.png){width="6.179245406824147in"
height="3.3119313210848644in"}

**Figure 4.4.7:** Water demand projections for Palestine [@Ives2018]

## Population growth and socio-economic development for Ghana

Population growth and how socio-economic development might change
consumption patterns were used for water and electricity demand
projections in Ghana. United Nations population forecasts
[@UNDESA2019] were used to create three population growth scenarios:
the medium estimation, and the upper and lower 95% percentiles from the
probabilistic scenarios.

Current domestic per capita consumption rates in Ghana are 351 KWh/per
capita of electricity [@WorldBank2021]. Ghana is currently considered
middle-income, however, its per capita consumption rates are lower than
comparable countries. According to the World Bank development indicators
[@WorldBank2021], lower middle-income countries, middle-income
countries and upper middle-income countries have electricity
consumptions of 749 KWh/per capita, 2044 KWh/per capita and 3307 KWh/per
capita, respectively. Electricity consumption rates in high income
countries are 8929 KWh/per capita, on average.

Therefore, future electricity demand projections were developed with the
expectation to achieve current Middle-Income consumption levels by 2050,
in the pessimistic scenario and high-income consumption levels for the
optimistic scenario. Consequently, the projections shown in Figure 4.4.8
are driven not only by population change but also by a progressive
increase in per capita consumption patterns.

![C:\\Personal\\Oxford\\CCG\\Course\\Lecture Block 7\\Images\\image
(1).png](media/image8.png){width="5.495760061242344in"
height="3.8301891951006124in"}

Figure 4.4.8: Electricity demand projections for Ghana (based on data
from @UNDESA2019 and @WorldBank2021)

## 

## Summary

In this mini-lecture we described the forecasting process for
infrastructure demand in four different countries in which the
NISMOD-International tool has been applied. With this approach, we have
illustrated the details, considerations and challenges of infrastructure
demand forecasting in developing regions.
