---
title: Mini-Lecture 11.4 - Calculating economic consequence of
  disruptions to businesses
---

# Metadata

**Keywords**

-   Disruptions to businesses

-   Macro-economic losses

## Authors

-   Olivia Becher

## Short description

This mini-lecture covers how economic activities are dependent on
reliable infrastructure services. A commonly applied method for
calculating the macro-economic impacts of infrastructure service
disruptions is introduced. Case studies are then explored which
illustrate how the analysis can be applied to a range of infrastructure
types and kinds of economic activity.

## Learning objectives

-   To recognise how various economic activities depend on
    infrastructure services
-   To quantify the macro-economic impacts of infrastructure
    disruptions.

# Lecture content

## Introduction

Many economic activities are dependent on reliable infrastructure
services. When infrastructure disruptions impact businesses, they have
cascading macro-economic impacts. This can occur in a variety of ways,
three examples are outlined below:

1.  Many factory operations require a reliable supply of water and
    electricity. If factory operations are disrupted due to power or
    water supply cuts, this may cause further ripple effects through
    supply chains [@Koks2019]

2.  As a key node of supply chains, when port infrastructure is
    disrupted, the flow of goods will also be disrupted, possibly across
    large scales [@Verschuur2021]

3.  A more nuanced example would be the potential impact of future
    droughts on cooling water shortages to thermo-electric power plants,
    and the potential consequences of that for increasing electricity
    prices in the future [@Byers2020].

It is important to understand the full cost of infrastructure service
disruptions to prioritise funding for adaptation. This section first
introduces a commonly used approach for understanding economic
disruptions through Input-Output modelling. This is followed by three
case studies that explore the importance of infrastructure for economic
activities and how disruptions may have broader, macro-economic
consequences.

## Input-Output modelling

Input-Output (IO) tables describe the rate of transaction between
different production sectors. IO impact assessments involve quantifying
the economic impacts of changes in the production from one sector for
other dependent sectors.

As discussed previously, when infrastructure disruptions occur, they may
disrupt production or other economic activities. Thus, IO impact
assessments can be, and are increasingly being, integrated with spatial
infrastructure network models to quantify indirect economic losses
associated with infrastructure failures.

## Macro-economic impacts of port disruption

@Verschuur2021 used IO tables to perform a criticality analysis of port
and maritime transport networks globally with respect to their
interdependency with global supply-chains, concluding that several
low-income countries and island states were often more dependent on
maritime transport through one or two key ports than higher income
countries.

They found more examples, such as the Congo, Malta, Mauritius and
Tanzania, where 20.3-43.5% of economic activity was dependent on trade
flows flowing through a single port. Their study also showed, on a
global scale, that 9.3% of the total industry output depends upon trade
flowing through the top 10 ports, with the port of Shanghai alone
embedding 1.7% of global output.

Therefore, large macro-economic impacts, both on a national and global
scale, could be expected when ports are affected by climatic extremes.

## Macro-economic impacts of electricity disruption

@Koks2019 combined geospatial locations of electricity infrastructure
assets in the south-east of England supplying to local industrial areas,
with a multiregional supply-use IO model of the UK economy that traced
the impacts of electricity flooding causing supply-side disruptions to
businesses, which led to macro-economic losses across 37 subnational
economic regions of the UK.

This study, involving the stress testing of every combination of
failures of five substations exposed to more than 1-metre of flooding,
demonstrated that for a 1 in 1,000-year flood event business disruptions
at a local level were magnified by a factor of 23 when incorporating
electricity failure in the loss assessment. The left panel of Figure
11.4.1 shows projected reduction in employment per sector due to extreme
flooding in the southeast of England. The right figure shows systemic
disruption which also accounts for the disruption to businesses and
associated consequence for employment caused by flood-induced
electricity supply disruption. The systemic disruption is significantly
greater and, indeed, when looking at a national level, the results
showed that daily direct output flow losses could increase up to a
factor of 33 and total output flow losses up to a factor of 3, when
including electricity failure in the loss assessment.

![Fig.Â 6](media/image1.png){width="6.260416666666667in" height="5.1in"}

**Figure 11.4.1:** Projected reduction in employment due to extreme
flooding at business asset locations (left) and at both business asset
locations as well as the electricity assets that serve them (right), in
absolute (top) and relative (bottom) terms [@Koks2019]

## Drought impacts on energy prices

The previously mentioned examples relate to the macro-economic impacts
of infrastructure asset failures due to the dependence of various
economic activities on services including transport, water and energy.
However, climate hazards can also affect the resource or commodity being
provided by infrastructure systems, going on to cause macro-economic
ripple-effects through price variations. For example, a common form of
electricity generation is via thermo-electric power plants, which relies
on vast volumes of water for cooling plant equipment. Thus, cooling
water shortages or increasing water temperatures may have a severe
impact on the rate of electricity generation. A reduction in supply is
likely to lead to increased electricity prices.

@Byers2020 investigated the risks that cooling water shortages pose to
thermo-electric power plants in the UK, considering present, near future
and far future climate scenarios. They coupled this analysis to an
economic model of electricity supply, demand and prices to find that the
macro-economic impacts of future droughts, via increased electricity
prices, range from GBP29--66 million per year.

## Summary

This mini-lecture provided an overview of the interaction between
infrastructure services and the economy, and various case studies that
explore how the broader economic impacts of infrastructure failures can
be quantified. You should now be able to recognise how various economic
activities depend on infrastructure services and quantify the
macro-economic impacts of infrastructure disruptions.
