---
title: Mini-Lecture 11.2 - Calculating direct asset damage and
  interruptions to network flows
---



keywords:

-   Direct damages

-   Indirect damages

-   Damage assessment for transport sector

authors:

-   Olivia Becher

---

This mini-lecture discusses the difference between direct and indirect
consequences of infrastructure failure. The case of the transport sector
is used to illustrate the differences between direct and indirect damage
assessments for infrastructure.

# Learning objectives

-   Conceptually understand the difference between direct and indirect
    infrastructure damages
-   Be able to calculate direct and indirect damages for the transport
    sector.



# Introduction

Traditionally, infrastructure risk assessments conducted by engineers,
insurers or government would only account for direct damages. However,
the indirect damages caused by interruptions to infrastructure network
flows can be significant.

This section will discuss the differences between direct and indirect
damage assessment. Direct and indirect impacts will be discussed in turn
from a conceptual standpoint, before exploring the difference in more
depth for the transport sector.

# Direct damages: a function of exposure and vulnerability

To quantify the direct damages to infrastructure, physical hazard
exposure analyses are overlaid with fragility or vulnerability
functions. Fragility curves are functions that describe asset
vulnerability, or the measure of negative consequences suffered due to
failures when exposed to a hazard of given magnitude and extent, see
mini-lecture 10.2.

@Koks2019, estimated the global exposure of road and railway assets to
a range of probabilistic climatic and geohazards (tropical cyclones,
surface flooding, river flooding, coastal flooding, and earthquakes) to
quantify the direct expected annual damage costs (EADs) to road and rail
assets at national and sub-national scales.

Figure 11.2.1. shows the relative exposures of road and rail assets
globally, highlighting that low income and lower to middle income
countries had the highest multi-hazard exposures. It was found that
\~27% of all road and railway assets globally were exposed to at least
one hazard with a 1 in 250 return period and \~7.5% of the road and
railway assets are exposed to a 1 in 100-year flood event.

**Figure 11.2.1:** Global multi-hazard transport infrastructure exposure
[@Koks2019]

# Indirect damages: a function of the strength of connection between infrastructure sectors

While direct damages help understand the extent of physical stock of
assets that are at risk, they provide an incomplete picture about the
wider consequences of infrastructure failures that arise due to
dependencies between infrastructure sectors.

Indeed, by incorporating the effects of disruptions of infrastructure
services on the dependent population on each individual infrastructure
asset across a network, a much more valuable metric can be achieved
across infrastructures.

The electricity sector is the most pronounced example of this, as almost
all other infrastructure sectors - including water, telecommunications,
transport and gas - require electricity supplies.

Figure 11.2.2 represents the electricity network and its connections to
other infrastructures. This shows how the consequences of failure of a
given electricity asset may have cascading impacts to other
infrastructures such as telecommunications.

**Figure 11.2.2:** Illustration of the structure of electricity
infrastructure networks and its interconnections with other sectors
[@Pant2018a]

This clearly also has implications for our understanding of the extent
of disruption to end-users and dependent economic activities, which will
be discussed in the subsequent mini-lecture (11.3).

# Indirect impacts of transport sector disruptions

In the transport sector, calculating the direct consequence of natural
hazards would simply involve calculating the economic cost of repairing
the physical damages to the affected section of road or rail. However,
this neglects the indirect consequences of a section of road or rail
being out of service.

Given that the transport network is fundamental for the movement of
goods and labour, redirecting this flow via a less efficient route will
be associated with an additional cost.

Figure 11.2.3 shows how flood damage to a section of road leads to the
rerouting of flows of goods and services, resulting in both direct and
indirect losses. The solid red line shows a route from A to B. When a
section of the road is damaged by a flood event - indicated by the
warning sign -- vehicles must take the longer route indicated by the
dashed red line. The damage to the section of road is, of course,
associated with a direct economic cost in line with what it would cost
to repair it. However, there is also a cost associated with re-directing
the transportation of goods via the alternative route. The latter cost
is the indirect cost of disruption.

**Figure 11.2.3:** Illustration of how the flow of goods and services
would have to be rerouted during a flood, and hence how the costs of the
flood damage go beyond the cost of reconstructing the section of road
that is directly affected [@Hall2019]

# Transport sector indirect damage assessment case study: Tanzania

The cost of rerouting the flow of freight under scenarios of present and
future flooding was quantified by @Pant2018b in Tanzania. Figure 11.2.4
shows the rerouted Annual Average Daily Flow (AADF) of freight for road
network links (2016) and bottom right shows the projected cost of
rerouting for road network links (2030).

**Figure 11.2.4:** The rerouted AADF of goods per section of road in
Tanzania [@Pant2018b]

This analysis is powerful for identifying hotspots of infrastructure
criticality, where the effects of flooding not only include the
rehabilitation of damaged assets but also include the cost of the
rerouting of goods during the period of disruption. Hotspots are
identified where a lack of transport network redundancy means the route
that substitutes the affected route is far less efficient. This may also
help to guide the prioritisation of adaptation funds to where there is a
lack of network redundancy.

Both direct and indirect consequences of infrastructure failure affect
society. The next section explores how the extent of disruptions to
people can be quantified.

# Summary

This lecture provides a comparison between direct and indirect
infrastructure damages, using the transport sector as an in-depth case
study. You should now be able to conceptually understand the difference
between direct and indirect infrastructure damages and be able to
calculate of direct and indirect damages for the transport sector.
