---
title: Mini-Lecture 11.1 - Introduction to calculating damage and
  disruption
---

# Metadata

## Keywords

-   Direct and indirect damages

-   Infrastructure service disruptions

## Authors

-   Olivia Becher

## Short description

This mini-lecture provides an overview of the full range of impacts of
infrastructure disruptions. First, the difference between direct and
indirect consequences of infrastructure disruption is discussed,
followed by the potential impacts of infrastructure disruptions to
people and the economy.

## Learning objectives

-   To recognise that infrastructure failures may propagate to affect
    other infrastructure assets, dependent populations and the economy
-   To recognise the importance of considering the indirect impacts of
    infrastructure failures, as well as disruptions to people and the
    economy, for risk analysis.

# Lecture content

## Introduction

Infrastructure is vulnerable to climate hazards such as flooding.
Depending on the severity of the hazard and the vulnerability of an
asset, infrastructure assets may fail and cause a range of disruptions.
So far, only direct damages to infrastructure have been discussed in
depth, in Lecture 10.

This lecture will explore the full range of disruptions, including a
recap on direct damage assessment in the following sub-section (*Direct
damages - recap*), followed by an overview of cascading impacts to other
infrastructure systems (*Indirect damages*), dependent populations
(*Disruptions to people*) and economic activities (*Disruptions to the
economy*).

Figure 11.1.1 provides an overview of the multiple potential impacts of
flood-induced infrastructure failure. Boxes are affected by flooding in
various different ways, either directly due to flood inundation,
indirectly due to power supply cuts as a result of electricity
substations being inundated, or due to supply chain disruptions from
dependencies with other entities affected by flooding.

The difference between the two panels shows how the problem can be
approached differently, with different outcomes. On the left, the
entities that are indirectly affected by electricity disruptions are not
considered, whereas on the right, this is accounted for. The affected
service area, represented in grey shading, is much greater when
accounting for the indirect impacts of electricity supply disruptions,
demonstrating the importance of accounting for the full range of
consequences of asset failure when quantifying impacts to populations
and businesses.

**Figure 11.1.1:** Illustration of the range of types of impact of flood
damages, including direct impacts and indirect impacts to assets that
are dependent on affected business facilities or infrastructure services
[@Koks2019]

The following sections will introduce the key concepts that are
important for understanding the full range of disruptions caused by
infrastructure failures.

## Direct damages - recap

Direct damage to infrastructure is defined as the physical stock damaged
during an extreme event, such as flooding. Different infrastructures
have 1) different vulnerabilities to failure for a given severity of
hazard and 2) different economic costs associated with failure.

Asset vulnerability can be formalised through fragility curves, which
were discussed in Lecture block 10. This can be used to understand the
economic burden of natural hazards on infrastructure by assigning a
monetary value to the level of damage associated with a given shock
event. This economic damage is a function of an asset's reconstruction
costs.

Figure 11.1.2 below shows the relationship between load (e.g., flood
depth) and economic damages [@Lamb2010].

**Figure 11.1.2:** Schematic showing the relationship between a given
load and economic damages, a distribution of potential economic damages
associated with a given load can be used to incorporate uncertainty into
the analysis [@Lamb2010]. Note that that in the figure, the x axis
describes a "load" which describes the severity of a particular hazard.
For example, in the case of flooding, the "load" may be the depth of
flood inundation.

This is a commonly applied method by engineers and other stakeholders to
form a basis for decision-making. However, this calculation does not
account for the indirect impacts of infrastructure assets on other
infrastructure systems.

## Indirect damages

Infrastructure systems are interconnected, and can thus be
conceptualised as a system of interconnected systems, or a
system-of-systems.

A characteristic of this complex, interwoven infrastructure
system-of-systems is that asset failures in one system may have
cascading impacts on other systems.

For example, water infrastructure assets that abstract, pump and treat
water, are strongly dependent on having a reliable and consistent
electricity supply. Therefore, when the electricity substation that
supplies a water asset is disrupted, the impacts of that will not only
be felt at the electricity substation, but also at the dependent water
supply infrastructure.

These second-order impacts of infrastructure failures on the operations
of other infrastructure systems are known as *indirect* damages in order
to distinguish from the previously discussed *direct* damages.

Indirect damages may significantly contribute to the overall damages
incurred during an extreme event, and may even outweigh the direct
damages incurred. This will be discussed further in mini-lecture 11.2.

## Disruptions to people

Society is dependent on the basic services provided by infrastructure
systems such as electricity, water and transport. The criticality of
different infrastructure assets is a function of the population they
serve, with more critical assets serving a greater number of people.
This metric of criticality is important for decision-makers who wish to
efficiently allocate funds to the assets that serve large populations
who are, therefore, exposed to asset-level disruptions.

It is important to consider both direct and indirect effects when
calculating the level of disruption caused by infrastructure failure.
For example, consider two electricity substations that are equally
exposed to flooding. Both assets supply 1,000 households but one also
supplies a water treatment facility which, in turn, supplies a further
1,000 people. The most efficient allocation of available funds for flood
protection works would be towards the substation that indirectly serves
the further 1,000 people served by the water treatment facility.

Figure 11.1.3 shows how the disruption cascades from (1) source nodes --
which generate resources, (2) intermediate nodes -- which transmit
resources from the source nodes to further nodes, and (3) sink nodes --
which are connected directly to the customers to deliver the resources
generated at the source nodes. Quantifying the extent of infrastructure
disruptions to people will be discussed in depth in mini-lecture 11.3.

![image](media/image2.jpeg){width="4.159428040244969in"
height="4.097772309711286in"}

**Figure 11.1.3:** Illustration of how a hazard goes on to affect
dependent populations and how the complex relationship between
infrastructure assets will determine the extent of a disruption
[@Pant2018]

## Disruptions to the economy

Various economic activities are also affected by disruptions to
infrastructure services.

One example of this is the impact of disruptions to port infrastructure
- e.g. caused by hurricanes - on supply chains. Such supply chain
disruptions could go on to have cascading repercussions on manufacturing
operations, which may impact other dependent economic activities and/or
end-users.

Manufacturing operations are not only dependent on transport
infrastructure, but also electricity and water. Therefore, if the
electricity or water assets that supply a factory is disrupted, this may
in turn disrupt operations at the factory.

The wider economic impacts of infrastructure disruptions are important
to understand for decision-making. This will be discussed in
mini-lecture 11.4.

## Summary

The mini-lecture provided an overview of the multiple outcomes of
infrastructure failures on other infrastructure assets, to dependent
populations and various forms of economic activity. You should now be
able to recognise that infrastructure failures may propagate to affect
other infrastructure assets, dependent populations and the economy, as
well as the importance of considering these multiple outcomes of failure
for risk analysis.
