---
title: Mini-Lecture 20.3 -- Next steps for infrastructure sustainability
  and resilience
---

 

keywords:

-   Sustainable infrastructure

-   Future directions

-   Data availability

authors:

-   Prof Jim Hall

---

This mini-lecture looks towards future innovations in infrastructure
systems analysis, which can be expected in the coming years. We also
consider the potential for more widespread uptake of the datasets and
tools that have been provided in this course.

# Learning objectives 

-   Have some knowledge of future directions in infrastructure systems
    analysis
-   Understand how technological innovation can help to promote the
    uptake of methodologies for infrastructure systems analysis.

 

# Introduction

This lecture series has described the state-of-the-art in infrastructure
systems modelling. We have reviewed methods for system analysis and risk
assessment. This is a very exciting time because of the combination of
new data sources, computational methods and digital platforms that are
providing universal access to new tools and datasets. These innovations
will continue at pace in the future. However, there are still gaps in
knowledge that will not be immediately filled by technological
innovation. Local contextual knowledge and expertise continue to be
essential ingredients for sustainable infrastructure decision making.

# Opportunities from new data sources

New data sources are revolutionising our capacity for infrastructure
systems analysis. Three notable examples are:

1.  OpenStreetMap (OSM) provides global data on the location of roads.
    The transport network risk analysis that we have described in this
    course (see also @Koks2019) makes extensive use of OSM, though it
    is supplemented with other local data. OSM is not necessarily
    complete and is not a topologically correct network, but it provides
    a good starting point for any land transport infrastructure
    analysis.

2.  Nighttime light data from satellite observations on clear nights has
    been widely used to estimate the spatial distribution of the use of
    electricity services, as well as many other factors associated with
    spatial economic development. Nighttime light data provides a
    valuable snapshot of electricity use, especially in inaccessible
    places where electricity use data may not be completely reported.

3.  The Automatic Identification System (AIS) is a satellite tracking
    system for all large ships. AIS data has enabled us to track ship
    movements worldwide [@Verschuur2020] and monitor the impacts of
    extreme climatic events at ports.

New data sources are continuing to become available thanks to high
resolution satellite observations, crowd sourcing of data, social media
platforms and natural language processing of written documents. We can
expect further rapid innovations in the near future, which will continue
to revolutionise our capacity for infrastructure systems analysis
anywhere on Earth.

# Advanced systems analysis

Analysis of large complex infrastructure systems has been made possible
thanks to increasing computing capacity. Some aspects of systems
analysis that have been described in this lecture series, notably for
climate risk analysis, require large numbers of computations to evaluate
many different scenarios. We have explored the use of optimisation
methods, which are also computationally expensive.

As we all know, there is ever-increasing computational capacity, which
is widely accessible thanks to cloud computing facilities. We foresee
these advances continuing in the future, so computational resources are
unlikely to be the main constraint on our analysis capabilities. The
greater challenge comes from the need to write dependable code to do
analysis of complex systems, which is verified and validated. The move
towards open-source code helps to ensure that systems analysis is open
to scrutiny and widely available.

# Platforms for decision support

Infrastructure systems analysis is being made available through decision
support platforms. In this course we have introduced the National
Infrastructure Systems MODel (NISMOD) platform, which supports
sustainable and resilient infrastructure provision. These platforms are
increasingly accessible, including through web applications. The figure
below (Figure 20.3.1) provides an example of the NISMOD interface for
transport network vulnerability analysis in Argentina, which identified
hotspots of infrastructure vulnerability and helps to prioritise
adaptation actions. In the future we will be providing a global platform
for infrastructure risk analysis and adaptation prioritisation, based on
analysis of globally available datasets. This will provide a starting
point for more in-depth analysis, supplemented with locally obtained
data, anywhere on Earth.

![](media/image1.png){width="6.5in" height="3.563888888888889in"}

**Figure 20.3.1:** Example of the NISMOD interface for transport network
vulnerability analysis in Argentina

# Capacity building

New datasets, computational tools and decision support platforms are
providing wider access to advanced analytics to support infrastructure
decision-making. However, using these platforms requires technical
capacity within infrastructure organisations, in government departments
and agencies, and the private sector. We have found that having
government organisations with a mandate for sustainable infrastructure
and capable staff is essential for achieving effective infrastructure
systems planning and implementation. We refer to that as the 'enabling
environment' which was discussed in Lecture Block 19. Being able to use
data and tools for infrastructure systems analysis requires some
capacity for geospatial analysis, and ideally also a high-level
programming language. More senior executives do not necessarily need
these skills, but they need to understand the principles of
infrastructure systems analysis and the relationship with
decision-making, as described in this course.

# Summary

The aim of this course has been to promote knowledge and uptake of
methods for infrastructure systems analysis in support of sustainable
and resilient infrastructure. These types of analyses are rapidly
becoming more feasible thanks to a revolution in the accessibility of
relevant datasets. New analytical tools, which are enabled by rapid
advances in computing power, are becoming embedded in decision support
tools that assist with infrastructure prioritisation and risk analysis.
Use of these capabilities requires on human capacity and a mandate for
sustainable infrastructure within relevant organisations.
