---
title: Mini-Lecture 20.1 - Summary and learning outcomes for
  infrastructure sustainability and resilience
---



keywords:

-   Infrastructure resilience

-   Decision-making

-   Uncertainty

authors:

-   Prof Jim Hall

---

This mini-lecture draws together themes and conclusions from the whole
course. We examine how the concepts and learning in this course factors
into decision-making about sustainable and resilient infrastructure. We
present a generic risk management cycle and highlight the main
challenges in decision-making, relating to valuation and uncertainty.

# Learning objectives

-   Place the learnings from the previous lectures into the context of
    infrastructure decision-making
-   Critically review concepts of infrastructure sustainability and
    resilience
-   Recognise the fundamental challenges of valuation and uncertainty.



# Decision making for sustainable and resilient infrastructure

The materials in this course aim to improve decision-making about
infrastructure systems. We regard infrastructure decisions as being
fundamental for sustainability because infrastructure provides services
that are essential for sustainable development, and can lock in patterns
of development for decades and centuries into the future.

There are many different versions of infrastructure decision-making:
planning, design, finance, construction, operation, maintenance,
regulation, decommissioning. These are discussed further in the next
mini-lecture. These decision-making processes can be regarded as part of
a continuous cycle of managing infrastructure services and risks (Figure
20.1.1). Several different versions of this classic decision-making
cycle exist. They combine a process of problem formulation (labelled as
'scoping' in Figure 20.1.1), analysis (which entails creation of
options, assessment and evaluation), and implementation (which involves
monitoring and evaluation, eventually leading to problem reformulation).
Figure 20.1.1 also recognises how these decision-making processes are
embedded within institutional and societal contexts, which has been
discussed in terms of the 'enabling environment' in Lecture 19.

![](media/image1.png){width="6.416666666666667in"
height="4.358397856517935in"}

**Figure 20.1.1:** Iterative risk management framework [@IPCC2014]

# Sustainability as the goal of infrastructure systems

In Lecture 1, we examined the relationship between infrastructure
systems and sustainability. We explained the mutual relationship between
infrastructure and the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), in which the SDGs help to define the purpose of infrastructure
and also constrain *how* infrastructure is delivered. The SDGs thereby
provide a framework for what infrastructure is aiming to achieve. Some
of the SDGs, like water (SDG 6) and energy (SDG 7) are clearly related
to infrastructure services, as is SDG 9, which has infrastructure in the
title. But we find that infrastructure influences the delivery of all 17
of the SDGs. Thus, we argue that the SDGs provide an overall framework
for what we are endeavouring to achieve through infrastructure
decisions.

The SDGs explicitly represent multiple goals and objectives. The
multi-objective nature of infrastructure decision-making is a recurrent
feature. We are usually aiming to achieve several, not necessarily
commensurate, goals with infrastructure. A bridge might be regarded as a
way of getting from A to B, but there are several benefits that are
achieved from that enhanced accessibility: trade, proximity to
employment, access to government services, access to culture and
recreation, to name but a few. However, it can also create new exposure
to hazards such as hurricanes or floods. Infrastructure decision-making
has to navigate these multiple objectives.

Juggling multiple objectives inevitably exposes problems of valuation:
if a piece of infrastructure delivers multiple services that we value,
as well as introduce new risks, how do we compare those things with each
other? Either we can seek to monetise all of the benefits and costs from
a piece of infrastructure, or we can adopt a multi-attribute, or
multi-objective, approach to decision-making. We have seen both versions
of decision making in these lectures.

# Where does resilience fit into decision-making?

Resilience is often cited as a desirable attribute of infrastructure
systems. It surely is. But it seems to be a different type of attribute
to the beneficial services that infrastructure provides: energy, water,
accessibility. Resilience is not a goal in its own right, it is an
attribute of a system, which means that other services that we value
will continue to be provided when the system is subject to a shock or
disturbance... or at least the system will cope and recover services in
a reasonably graceful way after the shock. Thinkers about resilience
also value the capacity to learn from shocks so that systems can 'build
back better'.

However, enhancing the resilience of a system is seldom cost-free, so a
large part of these lectures has focused upon how we quantify risk and
resilience in order to justify investments in adapting systems to
enhance their resilience. Risk and resilience are closely related, as we
have seen that risk quantifies the expected (harmful) outcomes from a
system under a very wide range of possible hazard conditions. We expect
a more resilient system to have fewer harmful outcomes, because:

1.  It can resist a greater shock before it suffers disturbance

2.  It can cope and recover, so the duration of the impact is less

3.  When it has recovered it will perform better.

Usually the focus of risk analysis is on the resistance of a system --
this is what is quantified in a fragility curve. But we can extend risk
analysis to incorporate the duration of disturbance, which is a function
of emergency coping capacity.

# Where do infrastructure options come from? 

The focus of this course has been on analysis -- analysing performance
of, and risks to, infrastructure systems. We have explained how to
analyse and choose between infrastructure options, but have paid less
attention to where options actually come from. We have reviewed options
for infrastructure systems -- in particular, nature-based solutions.
However, on the whole, the process of creating infrastructure options is
a creative process that needs to be matched to particular circumstances.
Many alternatives already exist and new technologies, for example in
smart grids and electric vehicles are rapidly reaching maturity. When
you face an infrastructure planning or design problem in a particular
context you will need to review the available options. You can then use
the methods described in this course to help choose between them and
create the most appropriate portfolio of different options. Typically,
you will be looking to use different options in combination, so that
they complement each other and compensate for each other's deficiencies.
You will wish to consider the sequence of interventions, and how that
sequence can be adapted, depending on uncertain future conditions.

# Dealing with uncertainty

Uncertainty about what the future holds is one of the greatest
challenges in decision-making. We think about two sources of
uncertainty:

1.  **Aleatory uncertainty**: Associated with random variations in
    nature, such as the arrival of storms or the occurrence of
    earthquakes. We deal with this type of uncertainty by using
    probabilities and risk analysis. In this course, we have said quite
    a lot about how probabilities are used in the analysis of climate
    risks to infrastructure systems. By using risk analysis, we are
    factoring aleatory uncertainties into our decision-making.

2.  **Epistemic uncertainty**: Due to our lack of knowledge about the
    future. We can, in principle, reduce epistemic uncertainties by
    collecting more information, though that may not be feasible in
    practice. We deal with epistemic uncertainties by testing multiple
    scenarios for what the future might hold and by doing sensitivity
    analyses.

Good decision-making processes carefully examine future uncertainties
and use appropriate methods for factoring these uncertainties into
decisions.

# Summary

Infrastructure is delivered through decision-making processes. To make a
decision, we need some options and alternatives and some goals or values
to distinguish between those alternatives. We are typically also faced
with uncertainty. A creative process is required to identify
options/alternatives that might contribute to solving a problem.
Typically, we will put together a combination of alternatives into a
*portfolio* which is implemented in a staged way, through time. It may
be dynamically adapted through time, which helps us to cope with
inevitable uncertainties.
