---
title: Mini-Lecture 20.2 -- Embedding sustainability and resilience in
  infrastructure decisions
---

 

keywords:

-   Decision-making

-   Infrastructure life-cycle

-   Planning

authors: 

-   Prof Jim Hall

---

This mini-lecture reviews decision points in the infrastructure
life-cycle. We briefly discuss the nature of decision-making at these
points and review how the methodologies presented in this course can be
factored into decision-making.

# Learning objectives

-   Understand the decision-making points in the infrastructure
    life-cycle
-   Understand how sustainability and resilience can be factored into
    these points.

 

# Introduction

Embedding sustainability and resilience into infrastructure systems
requires consideration of the whole infrastructure life-cycle (as
introduced in mini-lecture 20.1). Each point in this lifecycle is
discussed briefly in this mini-lecture. At each point, one needs to
consider the options that are available and how they will perform with
respect to the sustainability and resilience of the system under
consideration.

Our focus in this course has been on how infrastructures operate as
networks in order to provide services. Within infrastructure finance and
design, there is a focus on *projects*. We do not think that this focus
on projects will pass, as projects provide a natural bundling of an
initiative which can be approved, financed and implemented. However, the
focus upon projects can detract from the ways in which infrastructure
operates as a *system*. The performance of the existing (legacy) system
is often more important than the increment of additional functionality
that is provided by a project.

# Infrastructure planning

The greatest opportunities for embedding sustainability and resilience
in decision-making is at the earliest stages in infrastructure planning.
Infrastructure planning has traditionally been done in silos, within
separate government ministries. However, we are recognising the growing
interdependencies between infrastructure sectors, notably between energy
and transport, and due to the ubiquitous dependence on digital
infrastructure. Several governments have therefore embarked upon
cross-sectoral integrated infrastructure planning processes. In this
course we have already referred to the processes that were conducted in
Curacao and St Lucia [@Adshead2019; @Adshead2021; @Fuldauer2019].
These national infrastructure planning processes started with an
evaluation of the goals for infrastructure systems, based on the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and assessed options for
meeting those goals. This led to the creation of sequences of
investments and policy interventions that could contribute to
sustainably achieving those goals. This forms the basis for an
infrastructure investment pipeline, which is a forward plan of future
projects.

Considerations of sustainability need to be embedded in the planning
process from the outset, i.e. in terms of the stated goals of the
planning processes. Setting targets based on sustainability criteria
means that infrastructure planning will help to identify investments and
policies that contribute to sustainability.

# Infrastructure feasibility and investment project preparation

Once a project has been identified as a possibility in a national
infrastructure assessment, it needs to be developed in more detail up to
a point where it can be formally approved and funded. The infrastructure
planning processes should identify projects that contribute to
sustainability. The next step is to ensure that when project
alternatives are under consideration, sustainability is embedded in the
evaluation. At this stage, different approaches to achieving the
project's goals are conceived of and evaluated. Actually, it's at this
stage of project feasibility and project preparation that tools for
sustainability assessment are best developed. Such tools systematically
examine different aspects of project performance and evaluate them with
respect to sustainability criteria.

Impact assessment is also an essential aspect of feasibility studies.
The SDGs help to identify negative impacts that should be critically
reviewed during project preparation. These include impacts upon the
natural environment, for communities that are impacted by a project and
for the project's workforce. Environmental Impact Assessment provides a
formal process for evaluating these impacts.

Project preparation is the process by which the financial requirements
for a project are evaluated so that due diligence can be applied in the
financing process. Finance institutions have their own approaches to
embedding sustainability and climate resilience within project
preparation.

# Infrastructure project design

Embedding sustainability and resilience in project design is determined
to a large extent by the Terms of Reference that are provided by the
client. This may include how the impacts of climate change are to be
factored into the design or how carbon emissions embedded in materials
are to be accounted for. It is therefore important that these
sustainability criteria are recognised before the design process is
embarked upon. If they are part of the design brief, then the designer
can evaluate the alternatives with respect to these criteria.

Design is a creative process, which involves devising alternative
solutions to a particular challenge. Considering a wide range of
possible solutions at the design stage, including nature-based solutions
(NbS), provides the opportunity for delivering multiple sustainability
benefits. There is often an inherent conservatism in design, because
known solutions are less uncertain. Where more experimental solutions
are proposed, it will be necessary to emphasise on-going monitoring and
possible adaptation in the future.

# Infrastructure implementation, operation and maintenance

Negative environmental and social impacts from infrastructure need to be
managed during the construction process, though these should have been
identified and addressed well beforehand.

In too many cases, infrastructure fails to achieve the intended benefits
because it is not adequately maintained. Maintenance is an ongoing cost
which is too often trimmed from revenue budgets. Yet, analysis of the
resilience of infrastructure systems illustrates how important asset
condition is for ensuring that infrastructure can cope with
environmental threats. Monitoring helps to target asset management
activities where they are most needed.

Monitoring is also essential for adaptive management of infrastructure
systems, i.e. to trigger modifications and adaptations in response to
social or environmental changes. Monitoring is central to the dynamic
adaptive pathways [@Haasnoot2013] approach to adaptation which has
been discussed in Lecture 14. A particular attraction of nature-based
solutions is that they can be adapted through time, and indeed NbS
naturally adapt to changing environmental conditions. However, this
relies upon adequate monitoring and interpretation.

# Summary

Questions of sustainability and resilience need to become embedded
within decision-making processes. They should not be regarded as an
additional aspect or 'bolt-on', but rather as an integral aspect of
infrastructure provision. The most successful examples of adapting
infrastructure to a changing climate are found when climate change
becomes mainstreamed within the decision-making process, for example for
water resources or flood risk management. Similarly, cutting carbon
emissions has become an integral goal to energy, and increasingly also
transport, planning. In this mini-lecture we have reviewed the stages in
the infrastructure life-cycle to illustrate how sustainability and
resilience can become embedded.
