---
title: Mini-Lecture 13.2 - Projecting future infrastructure networks
---

# Metadata

## Keywords

-   Future infrastructure

-   Infrastructure risk

## Authors

-   Jasper Verschuur

## Short description

In this lecture, we will look at the different ways to predict future
infrastructure developments, including the spatial patterns of
development. Using a number of case studies, we showcase how combined
climate and infrastructure scenarios can inform future risk and
demonstrate the need to embed resilience into development projects.

## Learning objectives

-   Recognise the different ways of projecting future infrastructure
    developments
-   Gain insight into future risks of infrastructure disruptions due to
    infrastructure development
-   Acknowledge the need to incorporate resilience into future
    infrastructure projects.

# Lecture content 

## Introduction

In this lecture, we will discuss several ways to predict future
infrastructure needs, both in terms of expansion of existing
infrastructure systems and the construction of new infrastructure
assets. Moreover, we will discuss how to predict the greatest need for
new infrastructure.

As mentioned, the approach to predicting future infrastructure needs
depends on the type of infrastructure, their underlying drivers of
growth and the time scale considered for the prediction. When
considering the near-future projection of large-scale infrastructure
projects (e.g. hydropower dams) with long lifetimes, infrastructure
expansion plans are commonly already available. However, when looking at
more local infrastructure expansions (e.g. roads) and longer lifetimes,
predictive modelling frameworks are more useful.

These infrastructure projections can be combined with the existing or
future hazard information to understand the changes in exposure and risk
of asset damages, and the changes in the disruption of infrastructure
services to society. We will consider four cases:

-   Future dam development and its exposure to droughts

-   Future port development and the need for adaptation as a result of
    sea-level rise

-   Prediction of future spatial changes in road development

-   Prediction of future transport networks and their implications for
    infrastructure disruptions.

## Future dam development

    Very large infrastructure projects often need years to plan and execute. Therefore, for the near future (next 10-20 years), databases of planned projects often exist or can be assembled.
    The construction of hydropower dams is a good example of this. Hydropower is a renewable energy resource and constitutes 80% of the global renewable energy production. At the same time, only 22% of the worldâ€™s technologically feasible hydropower potential is exploited [@Zarfl2015]. 
    @Zarfl2015 constructed a database of all planned and currently-under-construction hydropower dams from a large variety of sources. This database provides an initial estimate of the future hotspots in hydropower development. All current-build and planned projects are included in Figure 13.2.1. One can see a large number of planned dams in South America, the Himalayas, the Mekong Basin, Turkey and the Balkan region. Most ongoing projects are happening in Asia, in particular China. In total, these 3,700 hydropower dams (>1 MW) will double the global hydropower capacity in the next 10-20 years. 
    These hydropower projects can be overlaid with hazard information to derive insights into whether developments are happening in hazard-prone areas or not. For instance, @Conway2017 evaluated hydropower supply disruptions of current and future dam projects in eastern and southern Africa, showing that dam development is taking place in areas prone to simultaneous drought conditions. Performing such risk analysis will help understand the risk of future service disruptions and identify potential mitigation strategies. 

    Figure 13.2.1: The location of dams currently under construction and planned [@Zarfl2015]

## Future port development 

For longer term time scales (2050-2100), the need for additional
infrastructure is often based on scenarios. For instance, demand for
port infrastructure is determined by changes in future trade, which are
driven by changes in population and economic activity.

For instance, projections suggest that maritime freight flows may triple
in volume by 2050 [@ITF2019]. As a result, port capacity will not be
adequate to meet demand as early as 2030. This timeframe coincides with
the expected sea-level rise (SLR) that requires ports to raise their
land areas. In a recent study [@Hanson2020], future maritime trade
scenarios were used to predict the necessary increase in port areas to
meet this trade demand for 2050 and adapt to SLR. Two trade scenarios
were considered: a mitigated future (green future + low SLR) and an
unmitigated future (fossil-fuel intensive future + high SLR).

Empirical formulas were used that estimate the port area required based
on the trade demand and a number of operational characteristics of
ports. The global need for port areas would increase from 1,364 km^2^ to
somewhere between 2,500-5,000 km^2^. As can be seen from Figure 13.2.2,
the largest increases are expected in Mexico, Russia, Canada and India.
For 2050, the costs associated with this construction are entirely
driven by the need for new port areas (not elevating ports because of
SLR), a finding that is consistent between two scenarios considered.
However, for 2100, the adaptation costs are becoming much higher for the
unmitigated scenario, although are still small relative to the
construction costs.

**Figure 13.2.2:** The percentage change in port areas between 2010 and
2050 for two scenarios (GR - mitigated; HR - unmitigated)
[@Hanson2020]

## Spatial developments of global roads 

In the previous section, we saw that projections of future
infrastructure can vary considerably from country to country. However,
even within countries, the need for infrastructure expansion might
differ. Therefore, for infrastructure types that cover the whole
country, such as roads, we are interested in the prediction of the
spatial pattern of infrastructure development.

In this example, we show how to predict future road expansion based on
the aforementioned Shared Socio-economic Pathway (SSP) scenarios
(mini-lecture 13.1). One study already predicted that total length of
roads globally will increase by 14-23%, depending on the SSP scenario
[@Meijer2018]. They do not show where road expansion will happen.
Therefore, we construct a simple grid-based regression model that
predicts the road density in a grid cell using the population, the
degree of urbanisation and the local GDP in that grid cell. We use a
[general additive
model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generalized_additive_model),
because it allows non-linear relationships, which in this case, might
reflect the need for road expansion depending on the development status.
We use this model to predict the future road expansion for 2050 for the
SSP4 scenario, as shown in Figure 13.2.3. A large increase in roads is
predicted in China, India and parts of Europe, in line with the changes
in population and urbanisation we saw for the SSP scenarios. A lot of
new road development will take place along the coast (e.g. China and
Japan), and hence it is important to factor in increasing risk from
climate change for these road development projects.

**Figure 13.2.3:** The change in future road density per grid cell for
2050 (compared to 2010) under the SSP4 scenario

## Future infrastructure risk

These future scenarios can also help to understand the future use of
infrastructure and the changes in risk if infrastructure is disrupted.
In a transport risk analysis for Tanzania [@Pant2018], this type of
analysis was performed. Apart from setting up a multi-modal transport
model for the present situation (Lecture 9), a future transport scenario
for 2030 was generated that includes: (1) change in freight flows due to
economic growth (5-9%), and (2) upgrading of existing infrastructure
assets (unpaved to paved roads), increasing the capacity of the system.
This future transport network was combined with future climate hazard
information (fluvial and pluvial flooding).

The combined effect leads to some very large freight flow increases in
the national transport network. The main highway system, for instance,
is predicted to increase freight volume by 22-27% annually, while some
inland ports in Tanzania will experience 11-19% increase in trade. An
example of the current and future trade flows for the national road
network is shown in Figure 12.2.4 (note the different legends).

The potential impacts of disruptions will also increase. For instance,
failures of some important road sections will increase the losses from
disruptions by a factor of three. Therefore, to manage risk, the
infrastructure needs to be upgraded to be less vulnerable to the impacts
of disruptions, or additional mitigation measures need to be taken, such
as rerouting options or fast recovery and repair of affected
infrastructure.

**Figure 12.2.4:** Changes in future road use as a result of economic
growth and infrastructure upgrades for 2030 (right) relative to 2016
(left) [@Pant2018]

## Summary

In this lecture we have discussed the different ways future
socio-economic scenarios can inform projections of infrastructure needs.
However, it is important to note that new infrastructure development
also means more infrastructure potentially at risk, and increased
resilience needs to be embedded into new infrastructure development
projects.
