---
title: Mini-Lecture 13.1 - Introduction to the future needs for
  infrastructure
---

# Metadata

## Keywords

-   Socio-economic growth

-   Infrastructure needs

-   Future risk

## Authors 

-   Jasper Verschuur

## Short description

In this lecture, an outlook is provided for the need to invest in
infrastructure in the near and distant future alongside the main drivers
of infrastructure development. In particular, we will take a deeper dive
into the different socio-economic scenarios, including a discussion on
the main differences between them.

## Learning objectives

-   Know what the future infrastructure investment gap is
-   Compare and contrast the different Shared Socio-economic Pathway
    (SSP) scenarios
-   Interpret studies that use SSP scenarios for future risk estimates.

# Lecture content

## Introduction

In lecture 12.1, we briefly discussed the multiple drivers of future
infrastructure risk. The main drivers identified were changes in
population and economic growth, which result in a larger demand for
infrastructure services. This can result in either a more intense use of
existing infrastructure, the expansion of existing infrastructure
networks, or new infrastructure to be built. In addition to that, we saw
that there are dependencies and feedbacks between society and
infrastructure. For instance, the COVID-19 pandemic has changed the way
we value (e.g. natural areas) and use infrastructure (e.g. more working
from home).

It is not yet clear how much infrastructure is needed in the near and
distant future. For instance, some initial estimates (see Figure 13.1.1)
show that an additional USD94 trillion of investments is needed by 2040,
which is more than the value of existing infrastructure (USD50 trillion)
[@Thacker2019]. Others have estimated that low- and middle-income
countries require investments of around 4.5% of GDP to achieve the
infrastructure-related Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and stay on
track to limit climate change to 2°C [@Rozenberg2019]. Projections
made by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) and the International Energy Agency (IEA), on the other hand,
estimate that an additional 60% increase in length of road and railway
is needed by 2050, which is equal to around USD45 trillion
[@Dulac2013].

Whatever the exact number might be, there is an enormous amount of
infrastructure needed to meet the needs of our future society.

**Figure 13.1.1:** An illustration of the global infrastructure gap for
2040, with the red circle showing the current stock and the blue circle
the investment need [@Thacker2019]

## Drivers of infrastructure needs

    To better understand where largest demand for new infrastructure lies, we can distinguish different drivers of infrastructure needs.
    As mentioned, a growing population and urban expansion highlight the need for an increasing coverage and expansion of infrastructure services. Most infrastructure networks, such as road, rail, water, electricity and telecommunications are directly coupled to the growth in populations. 
    Socio-economic growth may also change the ways in which we can afford certain infrastructure services, shifting demand. For instance, people might buy a car and start using the road network, while initially they could only afford taking the bus. Additionally, larger wealth may shift the quality of infrastructure being provided. For instance, water was initially only treated up to certain standards, but this will be upgraded to higher standards given society’s ability to pay for better quality water. Similarly, wealth changes might shift the need for a denser network, such as a larger number of telecommunications towers, to increase service speed. 
    Other infrastructure types, such as ports and airports, are more dependent on developments in terms of international trade flows or tourism, which are not just confined to national boundaries. For instance, increasing demand for products from a certain country requires that country to increase the port capacity. 
    For each type of infrastructure, it is therefore important to understand the current use and capacity of the systems and the main drivers of future infrastructure needs. 

## Introduction to Shared Socio-economic Pathways

Similar to the climate scenarios, scenarios of global development that
cover the uncertainty in future socio-economic conditions have been
developed. These societal development scenarios, called the \'Shared
Socio-economic Pathways' (SSP) cover both quantitative and qualitative
components [@ONeill2017].

The SSP scenarios are designed to construct a wider range of outcomes.
In total, five SSP scenarios are constructed with different development
outcomes for the year 2100 (Figure 13.1.2) They range from a
sustainability scenario (SSP1) to an inequality scenario (SSP4) and a
fossil-fuelled development scenario (SSP5). As can be seen, the outcome
scenarios differ with respect to the varying challenges of mitigation
and adaptation.

Although there is an exhaustive list of assumptions and factors behind
all the scenarios, the main demographic factors that drive the models
are population growth, fertility, mortality, migration and the degree
and type of urbanisation (e.g. well managed or poorly managed). In terms
of human development, factors that are included are education, health,
equity, gender equality and social cohesion. Similarly, a number of
underlying drivers are identified that cover the economy (growth, trade,
consumption and diet), institutions (international cooperation,
environmental policy), technology (carbon intensity, energy intensity,
technology transfer) and natural resources (fossil constraints,
environment, agriculture, land-use).

In the next sub-section, we will discuss some of the major differences
between the five scenarios.

**Figure 13.1.2:** The five SSP scenarios and how they relate to the
challenges for adaptation and mitigation. The key words show the main
differences between the scenarios [@ONeill2014]

## Differences between SSPs

In the previous sub-section we discussed that the Shared Socio-economic
Pathway scenarios are based on a large number of underlying drivers.
However, we can briefly summarise the main differences between the
scenarios (see Figure 13.1.3).

-   SSP1 leads to low challenges for both mitigation and adaptation,
    mainly as a result of sharp income growth, reduced inequality, good
    institutions, and a shift over time that prioritises sustainable
    development.

-   SSP3 is the opposite of SSP1 with challenges to both mitigation and
    adaptation. The challenges arise due to slow income growth and slow
    technological change, ineffective institutions and limited human
    capital.

-   SSP2 is a middle-of-the-road scenario leading to intermediate
    challenges to mitigation and adaptation.

-   SSP4 and SSP5 are a mix of the aforementioned scenarios. For SSP4,
    there is a growing inequality across and within countries. Moreover,
    there is low economic growth but high technological growth and human
    capital, making the mitigation challenge low. However, the
    adaptation challenge remains higher due to the large inequality in
    terms of income, education and access to institutions. In SSP5,
    economic growth is large, making adaptation challenges relatively
    low. However, energy and carbon demand grow quickly with a large
    reliance on fossil fuels, hindering mitigation efforts.

These broad-scale scenarios can form the input of a range of additional
models, including projections of the future risk of hazard impact under
the various scenarios. To do this, however, the SSP scenarios should be
coupled to spatially explicit maps of exposed assets.

**Figure 13.1.3:** The key assumptions of, and main differences between,
the SSP scenarios with regards to adaptation and mitigation
[@Bauer2017]

## Applications of SSP scenarios

To illustrate what the SSP scenarios can be used for, two examples are
shown below.

In the first example [@Gao2020], the SSP scenarios were used to model
the future evolution of urbanisation. In Figure 13.1.4, the evolution of
the total amount of urban land area is depicted, showing that the urban
land area for SSP5 may be around 3 times larger than in SSP1 and 75%
higher than SSP2 and SSP4. Moreover, the spatial evolution of urban
areas may differ considerably between scenarios. In Figure 13.1.5, the
spatial evolution of urban areas is shown for North America and Africa.
For both the United States and Africa, a large urban encroachment is
shown in the coastal areas under SSP5, while this urban expansion is
less pronounced in the SSP1 scenario.

In another example [@Winsemius2016], the SSP scenarios were used to
project future risk from riverine flooding. For the Mekong Basin, for
instance, flood risk may increase by 625% relative to 2010, mainly
driven by socio-economic growth. A similar large increase is found for
the Yangtze and Indus basins and the basins in Sub-Saharan Africa
(Niger, Volta). As evident, the way in which socio-economic growth
interacts with risk is very much location specific, therefore requiring
spatial scenarios of socio-economic development.

**Figure 13.1.4:** The evolution of global urban land over the 21^st^
century for different SSP scenarios [@Gao2020]

**Figure 13.1.5:** Spatial patterns of urbanisation in 2100 for two
regions (North America, Africa) and two SSP scenarios (SSP1, SSP5)
[@Gao2020]

## Summary 

In this lecture, we have identified the main drivers of future
infrastructure needs and the total infrastructure investment gap. We
discussed the different scenarios of future socio-economic growth and
illustrated how these scenarios can be used to model changes in
urbanisation rate and flood risk.
