---
title: Mini-Lecture 13.4 -- Future infrastructure needs in practice
---



keywords:

-   Infrastructure needs

-   St Lucia

-   Curaçao

authors: 

-   Lena Fuldauer

-   Daniel Adshead

--- 

This mini-lecture provides practical examples of identifying future
infrastructure needs, based on population growth, tourism growth and
climate scenarios. Examples are taken from applications of a methodology
to assess future infrastructure needs, usage and risk in the small
islands of Curaçao and Saint Lucia.

# Learning objectives  {#learning-objectives-1}

-   Recall an example of how population and tourism scenarios are used
    to project future infrastructure demand
-   Describe how a worst-case climate scenario can be used to identify
    changes in infrastructure use
-   Explain how future infrastructure exposure for one asset can been
    calculated.

 

# Introduction to case study examples on future infrastructure needs

In the previous mini-lectures 13.1 -13.3, we have explored the drivers
and ways in which we can predict the future need for infrastructure,
different usage of infrastructure, and the different ways future
infrastructure might be provided, which all include a set of different
methods (see mini-lectures 13.1 - 13.3).

Here, we show examples from practical applications of these methods at
the national scale, using examples of the Small Island Developing States
(SIDS) Curaçao and Saint Lucia. These focus both on sectoral, and
cross-sectoral examples and exemplify the different methods of
predicting future infrastructure needs, including:

i)  Future changes in infrastructure demand: population, tourism,
    economic growth

ii) Changes in the use of infrastructure due to climate change (using an
    example of how future climate projections in the dry season reduce
    river flow and thereby reduce the capacity of existing and future
    planned treatment plants)

iii) Location-specific future infrastructure assets and related
     infrastructure needs

iv) Location-specific future infrastructure assets and their exposure to
    future hazards.

# Estimating future infrastructure needs using population and tourism projections in practice

As described in mini-lecture 13.1, future infrastructure needs can be
estimated using changes in population or economic growth, amongst other
factors [@Otto2016; @Hall2016; @Ives2017]. Quantitative changes in
these long-term trends can be identified using, for example, information
on national economic or demographic projections, and can be complemented
with expert judgement.

These methods were applied at the national scale in the small island
Curaçao, including in the waste sector. Data on the current system
(2016) was collected using existing national documents and complemented
with data collected through interviews in 2017/18.

Population, tourism and economic growth were all identified as the main
drivers for future waste generation. As described in detail in
@Fuldauer2019, population and tourism growth-related waste factors,
which reflect various economic growth potentials for Curaçao, were
utilised in order to create a low, moderate, and high growth scenario
capturing future uncertainty (Figure 13.4.1).

**Figure 13.4.1:** Curaçao's future waste scenarios until 2050
[@Fuldauer2019]. Calculations were based on waste generation factors
for SIDS
[@[Mohee2015](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S095965261930678X#bib66); @[WorldBank2012](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S095965261930678X#bib110)],
residential growth scenarios
[@[terBals2014]](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S095965261930678X#bib6)
and tourism growth scenarios.

Various infrastructure strategies were then created (see mini-lecture
6.1), including an inaction, circular economy and a technology-led
scenario, in order to evaluate the performance of these strategies under
the various population and economic growth scenarios [@Fuldauer2019].

# Estimating future infrastructure usage using climate scenarios in practice

As described in mini-lecture 13.3, infrastructure supply and use can
also change in the future, including due to climate change. Notably, the
total annual supply of a type of infrastructure at a national level does
not always tell the full story due to factors affecting the way it is
distributed and used across a country.

Examples of this include chronic drought and reduced river flow impacts
on water infrastructure. While water treatment capacity *at a national
level* was shown to be sufficient to meet annual water demand in Saint
Lucia, the analysis accounted for the fact that chronic impacts of
climate change on river flows during the *dry season* leave many
communities with major water shortages throughout much of the year.
Often, these periods correspond with peak holiday periods where many
tourists arrive on the island. Figure 13.4.2 shows the possible extent
of this shortage on peak water use days, with the capacity of some water
intakes reduced by up to 60%.

In an inaction scenario, this disparity is projected to increase as (a)
population and tourism increases, and (b) drying trends intensify due to
climate change. Under a business-as-usual strategy, which includes the
implementation of confirmed projects, this shortage in peak water supply
is only slightly improved (Figure 13.4.3). In contrast, the national
infrastructure strategy, which includes adaptation to chronic river
runoff, can help eliminate the shortage and ensure continuous water
supply, including in the dry season (Figure 13.4.4).

**Figure 13.4.2:** Inaction with respect to water infrastructure into
the future

**Figure 13.4.3:** Business-as-usual investment in infrastructure into
the future leaves peak shortage in the dry season

**Figure 13.4.4:** A national infrastructure strategy, including water
loss reductions and infrastructure investments, can be a useful strategy
to adapt to reduced chronic river runoff and associated reduced
wastewater treatment capacity

# Estimating future infrastructure needs from proposed assets in practice

As described in mini-lecture 13.2, there are various ways in which
future infrastructure needs can be identified. Such infrastructure
expansions include the construction of new infrastructure assets, which
can be identified at a larger scale using future predictions or using
existing databases of infrastructure plans, at high spatial resolution
(see mini-lecture 13.2 and Lecture block 6).

In this practical example, we use existing databases of planned
infrastructure projects at the national scale for Saint Lucia, and
calculate the associated infrastructure needs and climate-related risk.

A database of five large infrastructure investments, which are to be
constructed in the coming years, was provided by the Government of Saint
Lucia (Figure 13.4.5)

**Figure 13.4.5:** Location of new infrastructure investments in Saint
Lucia [@Adshead2020]

Here, we showcase the future hazard risk for two of these new
infrastructure projects, including a major port and a major new road.

First, a large new infrastructure project involves the relocation of the
cargo services of the Port in the capital city to the Cul de Sac port,
shown in Figure 13.4.6 below. As described in detail in
[@Adshead2020], this location for cargo handling allows reduced
conflicts of resources and space with the cruise ship arrivals port in
the capital Castries. The analysis calculated the estimated
infrastructure needs of the port, which are summarised in Figure 13.4.6.

**Figure 13.4.6:** Estimated infrastructure need from proposed
relocation and expansion of cargo port [@Adshead2020]

The analysis finds that while the relocated cargo port will contribute
to increased trade and enhance agricultural productive capacity by
expanding access to international markets, it is critical to plan for
increased infrastructure needs from the electricity, water, wastewater
and water sectors resulting from the relocation and expansion of the
cargo port.

# Estimating future hazard exposure from proposed infrastructure assets

In the previous section, we analysed the potential infrastructure needs
resulting from proposed infrastructure assets. Here, we superimpose
these future proposed infrastructure assets with future hazard data to
identify potential hazard exposure.

As shown in Figure 13.4.7, we find that a fraction of the new port is
located in a hazard-prone area, and is exposed to a storm surge and a
flash flood scenario. Both these hazards are associated with tropical
storms, projected to increase in intensity with climate change
[@GOSL2017]. Moreover, the roads which lead to the port are also
exposed to these hazards, suggesting that accessibility to the port and
the critical services it provides for more than 70 Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) targets are potentially exposed
[@Fuldauer2021b].

![](media/image7.png){width="1.8355818022747157in"
height="1.6744181977252843in"}![](media/image8.png){width="5.611111111111111in"
height="4.957364391951006in"}

**Figure 13.4.7:** New proposed port in Saint Lucia exposed to storm
surge, flash flood and landslides [@Adshead2020]

Another key new infrastructure project is the construction of a new road
linking the north and the south of the island (see Figure 13.4.8).
Superimposing the future proposed road data with the hazard information,
we find that in terms of metres and percentage of the total road length
exposed:

> • 1% of total km exposed to storm surge (4-metre)
>
> • 6% exposed to flash floods
>
> • 4% exposed to landslides

![](media/image9.png){width="1.8886406386701662in"
height="1.4534886264216973in"}![](media/image10.png){width="5.708333333333333in"
height="5.5in"}

**Figure 13.4.8:** Proposed north-south road (red) potentially exposed
to storm surges, flash floods and landslides [@Adshead2020]

These results highlight the importance of integrating future climate
risk into infrastructure design at the outset of the planning process.
Given that it is estimated that more than USD80 trillion of investment
in new and existing infrastructure is required worldwide over the next
15 years [@UNFCCC2017], it is critical to ensure that climate risk is
appropriately considered. A comprehensive approach to adaptation of
infrastructure systems as part of the overall goal of achieving
sustainability will be essential.

# Summary

This mini-lecture provided an overview of practical examples of
identifying future infrastructure needs, based on population growth,
tourism growth and climate scenarios. These showcase how the content
introduced in mini-lectures 13.1 and 13.3 can be put into practice,
informing national scale decision-making.
