---
title: Mini-Lecture 13.3 - Changes in infrastructure dependencies
---



keywords:

-   Society

-   Feedbacks

-   Planning decisions

authors:

-   Jasper Verschuur

---

In this lecture, we will look at three additional critical factors that
determine the need and success of future infrastructure provision. These
factors include the changes in societal norms with regards to
infrastructure use, the different planning pathways towards success, and
the feedbacks between society and infrastructure and
intra-infrastructure feedbacks.

# Learning objectives

-   Analyse the additional critical factors that need to be considered
    for infrastructure planning
-   Evaluate how societal changes might change how infrastructure is
    being used
-   Identify possible infrastructure pathways and complementary
    infrastructure investment needs.

 

# Introduction

In mini-lecture 13.1 and 13.2, we explored the underlying drivers and
ways in which we can predict the future need for infrastructure.
However, apart from uncertainties in the underlying drivers, there are
other factors that need to be considered for future infrastructure
provision, in order to understand how infrastructure networks might
expand and how they may be used.

Three critical factors are considered in this lecture:

1.  Societal norms might change, which can change the use of
    infrastructure. For instance, the transition towards renewable
    energy changes the electricity networks. Moreover, COVID-19 has
    shown that societal norms might change (e.g. working from home),
    which change the way infrastructure is being used.

2.  There are important feedback loops and infrastructure lock-ins,
    which need to be considered. For instance, improved infrastructure
    systems that connect rural to urban areas might initiate migration
    to urban centres.

3.  There are different ways that infrastructure can be provided in the
    future (e.g. construct one big road versus a couple of smaller
    ones), which change the underlying network structure and hence use.

# Changes in societal norms

The COVID-19 pandemic has been an unexpected test of the resilience of
infrastructure systems. As covered extensively in Lectures 9-11, the
resilience planning of infrastructure was mainly focused on natural
hazards or other external shocks. However, in the case of COVID-19,
infrastructure has not been physically damaged, but the pandemic has
profoundly changed the ways in which people are using its services.

This has therefore also changed many infrastructure development
projects. For instance, airport expansions might be put on hold due to
expected drop in global flights in the near future, and COVID-19 has
made people reluctant to use public transport. Many governments had to
step in to save train operators and airports from financial collapse.

However, COVID-19 has boosted the dependence on digital communications
infrastructure to facilitate working from home. In Figure 13.3.1, the
acceleration of digitisation in the business environment is depicted,
setting the scene for what is expected to grow even further in the near
future [@McKinsey&Company2020].

The pandemic has also reinforced appreciation for the benefits of
walking, cycling and green spaces, which will be reflected in the way
urban areas are being rehabilitated and new urban areas will be
designed.

There is an expected acceleration of green infrastructure projects,
which are included in ['green recovery'
plans,](https://www.ox.ac.uk/news/2021-03-10-are-we-track-green-recovery-not-yet-hundreds-attend-oxford-un-eco-event)
which help to build back from the COVID-19 pandemic while accelerating
sustainability efforts.

The pandemic therefore will reshape the way we think and use
infrastructure for many years to come.

**Figure 13.3.1:** An illustration of the rapid increase in digitisation
of customer interactions due to the COVID-19 pandemic
[@McKinsey&Company2020]

# Societal feedbacks with infrastructure

Infrastructure can lock-in development by stimulating urban expansion
into areas that were initially hazard-prone or create new urban areas in
initially unconnected areas.

Construction of infrastructure, such as flood protection works and
reservoirs may provide a false sense of safety and may even lead to a
reinforcement of the risk to people. In 1942, Gilbert White coined the
concept of the 'levee effect' [@White1942].

This can be illustrated through the series of figures below on the
right-hand side (Figure 13.2.2). The increase in levee height over time
results in lower overall losses, generating a false sense of security
due to memory loss of the event. This can encourage the growth of
settlements in these initially at-risk areas. Should a large flood event
happen, resulting in embankment failure, it may trigger a large loss
event. This would trigger additional investments in the protection
works. This cycle of flood - levee upgrade -- memory loss -- settlement
increase -- flood -- levee upgrade, would keep on going until this
situation is rigorously changed (and at high cost).

On the other hand (left-hand side in Figure 13.3.2), a similar scenario
without levees creates more frequent loss events, but society gradually
adapts to it, preventing large-scale, disastrous losses
[@DiBaldassarre2015].

In other examples, the construction of infrastructure can lock-in
development in certain regions. For instance, it has been shown that
creating new roads will stimulate economic development in the initially
unconnected areas [@Alam2019]. However, in other cases, the
connection of initially unconnected villages may lead to a widespread
migration from rural to urban areas.

Therefore, it is essential to consider what the wider feedback processes
are between infrastructure provision and society.

**Figure 13.3.2:** An illustration of the levee effect on the right-hand
side, showing how the construction of levees can result in low risk
compared to the situation without levees, but can cause very extreme
losses if the levees fail. This loss event will in turn stimulate
additional investments. For the normal scenarios, losses will not change
much over time due to the adaptation effect of people not settling in
these areas [@DiBaldassarre2015]

# Infrastructure provision pathways

In the case that an infrastructure target is set, or demand for
infrastructure is forecasted to change, there are often still
uncertainties around how to achieve this goal most efficiently. In most
cases, multiple strategies can be considered. For instance, countries
can build new ports or expand existing ones to meet future trade demand.
Alternatively, different strategies exist to expand piped water supply
and electricity to rural areas.

In this section, we will explore this issue in detail for the example
objective to provide universal access to broadband internet in Africa at
a service of 10Mbps, which is the aim set by the UN Broadband
Commission. @Oughton2021 explored the different infrastructure and
service provision strategies to meet this target. In this paper, the
costs and technology requirements were calculated per strategy (four
strategies, 3G/4G and wireless or fixed) (Figure 13.3.3).

It was found that directly leapfrogging into 4G+wireless backhaul is the
most cost-efficient strategy instead of going from 3G to 4G, in
particular to connect rural areas. Moreover, it was found that the
number of people that can be connected differs per country, from half
the population in Uganda to almost 100% in Cote d'Ivoire. In addition,
infrastructure sharing (infrastructure shared between operators) can
significantly decrease cost, especially in reaching rural areas.

This example shows the many potential pathways to meet infrastructure
needs in the future, which all have inherent benefits and drawbacks. For
rapidly developing regions in particular, exploration of various
pathways is essential to prevent lock-in patterns of unsustainable
infrastructure provision.

**Figure 13.3.3:** The costs of achieving broadband universal services
in six countries in Africa for four infrastructure provision pathways
(3G vs 4G and fixed vs wireless) [@Oughton2021]

# Complementary infrastructure needs

So far, we have looked at projecting demand for individual
infrastructure systems. However, as discussed in Lecture 8,
infrastructure systems are interconnected with one another. Therefore,
complementary infrastructure provision is often needed.

In the previous example, for instance, the extension of
telecommunications infrastructure needs to be accompanied by the
expansion of electricity networks. For port infrastructure for instance,
access to roads and railways in both the port and the hinterland area
are critical to make the investment a success. These infrastructure
feedbacks can therefore be local, regional or even global. A prime
example is the Belt and Road Initiative (see Figure 13.3.4), which is a
trillion-dollar investment portfolio to better connect China with the
rest of the world. In order to do this, both the land and maritime
transport and energy infrastructure, in China and many other countries,
will be expanded to facilitate this increasing connectivity. This shows
the true interconnected nature of infrastructure expansions.

These interactions need to be kept in mind when planning for
infrastructure expansion. For instance, when plans are made to extend
the electricity network to initially unconnected areas, the planning
should keep in mind that other infrastructure investments might follow
in the near or distant future, such as telecommunication, transport or
water treatment, which need additional electricity to function.

In short, sketching out what type of societal and infrastructure
feedbacks are to be expected, and how complementary infrastructure
investment can be made, help to roll out infrastructure services in a
more efficient way.

**Figure 13.3.4:** The portfolio of planned projects under the Belt and
Road Initiative [@Brookings2019]

# Summary 

In the lecture we discussed additional critical factors for sustainable
and efficient future infrastructure development, which including taking
into consideration societal norms and feedbacks, and possible
infrastructure pathways and complementary infrastructure needs. This
lecture highlights that these factors need to be identified before
infrastructure plans are made.
