---
title: Mini-Lecture 19.3 -- National infrastructure planning units
---

# Metadata 

## Keywords

-   National infrastructure planning units (NIPUs)

-   National Infrastructure Commission

-   Case studies

## Authors

-   Nicholas Chow

## Short description

This mini-lecture introduces the ideas of national infrastructure
planning units and how they support better decision-making in
infrastructure governance through intersectoral and holistic
infrastructure analyses. We also examine the values of this approach and
two case studies which demonstrate some of the nuances unique to their
designs.

## Learning objectives 

-   Understand the approach and value of national infrastructure
    planning units as an independent alternative to siloed
    infrastructure analysis and planning
-   Recognise that national infrastructure planning units can take
    different forms, which need to be context-specific to their
    governance setting in order to be effective.

# Lecture content  {#lecture-content-1}

## The role of national infrastructure planning units

National infrastructure planning units (NIPUs) are governmental advisory
bodies whose sole function is to assess and develop strategies for
infrastructure longevity, improved quality of life among users, and
sustainable economic development. The construct of an independent NIPU
is relatively new, though similar responsibilities are seen under other
entities in different national contexts, like ministries of planning and
development, economic development boards, national security panels, and
strategic planning commissions---each of which have a much broader
purview than specific infrastructure.

The two most visible NIPUs are those in the United Kingdom and Australia
(UK National Infrastructure Commission (NIC) and Infrastructure
Australia, respectively), though other nascent entities exist (e.g. Te
Waihanga: New Zealand Infrastructure Commission). These entities share
some common structures like being independent statutory bodies with the
directives of setting and ensuring long-term infrastructure agendas and
continuity, driving change beyond physical infrastructure systems, and
creating new ideas for infrastructure development based on science and
technical analysis. As explicitly stated in their charters, these
existing entities do not serve to replace political decision-makers, but
instead communicate to governing bodies priorities, weaknesses, and
recommendations on leadership in the field [@NIC2017].

The following sections of this mini-lecture will discuss NIPUs and
present brief backgrounds and case studies of both the UK NIC and
Infrastructure Australia, highlighting their differences and strengths.
The mini-lecture will be structured into the following segments:

1)  The value of national infrastructure planning units

2)  Case study: Infrastructure Australia

3)  Case study: UK National Infrastructure Commission.

## The value of national infrastructure planning units

In practice, NIPUs overcome one of the common challenges faced by
governments with siloed infrastructure management (e.g. water, energy,
transportation ministries): a limited view of the comparative value,
impact, and prioritisation of projects, especially for decision-makers.
Within NIPUs, the inter-related system-of-systems approach recognises
that no one part of infrastructure systems can operate in isolation;
they must be evaluated holistically.

NIPUs are charged with a sole focus of evaluating and prioritising
infrastructure outcomes. This contrasts with other entities that may be
focused on implementing infrastructure projects as vehicles or tools for
economic development. In over-emphasising economic gains, this approach
might bias investments away from those with predominantly social
benefits. Focusing on infrastructure outcomes instead of economic
benefits --- especially across the 30--100-year lifecycles that are
typically seen in infrastructure assets --- also benefits governance, by
providing impartial guidance to ensure continuity over comparatively
short political cycles, where funding and priorities might shift
[@NIC2017].

While the most visible NIPUs appear to exist only in economically
developed countries, this approach to infrastructure governance likely
also has a place among developing nations. Currently in those contexts,
the critical service of intersectoral and holistic infrastructure
analysis is often met by consulting firms, which may use out-of-country
expertise without ensuring local capacity building and development. One
of the key services that these NIPUs also provide is a central, public
repository for infrastructure data, which enables further action among
other governance entities as well as academia.

## Case study: Infrastructure Australia

Infrastructure Australia (IA) is one of the earliest examples of a NIPU,
having been established in 2008 and strengthened in 2018. Its creation
received wide political support and strengthened perceptions of active
infrastructure planning at the national level. Prior to its existence,
the Australian government faced claims of inconsistent, top-down
approaches without sufficient, inter-sectoral consideration.

The creation of IA created a unique governance dynamic between state and
national actors that is worth noting. In Australia, states are
independently responsible for the provision of most large infrastructure
services, while the national government collected the main sources of
revenue: taxes. With the national government in control of revenue
collection and guiding infrastructure planning, state actors began to
see the need for state-level NIPUs. Over the last decade this has led to
a proliferation of multiple state-level actors who further
infrastructure governance in coordination with IA.

IA's current infrastructure evaluation process uses both a top-down
approach (considering national level infrastructure priorities) and a
bottom-up approach (evaluating individual projects submitted by the
public). Together, IA uses this information to inform the national
government on wider infrastructure goals and create a list of
prioritised projects based on different metrics. This list of
initiatives and projects utilises and displays predominantly qualitive
data, which allows it to easily shift with changing government
priorities while also providing data and transparency to stakeholders.

## Case study: UK National Infrastructure Commission

The UK NIC was created in 2015 and its mandate closely matches what
we've established as baseline features for a NIPU --- technically-based
intersectoral infrastructure assessments to inform continuity in
investment through political turnover. However, when compared to the
Infrastructure Australia NIPU, its creation followed a uniquely
economically-motivated path.

Specifically, it was created to *"look at the UK's future needs for
nationally significant economic infrastructure, help to maintain the
UK's competitiveness amongst the G20 nations, and provide greater
certainty for investors by taking a long-term approach to the major
investment decisions facing the country"* [@OECD2017]. This mandate
for increasing competitiveness is unique to the UK model and was
motivated by reports from the International Monetary Fund and the UK
National Audit Office, affirming that policy uncertainty was hindering
infrastructure investment. In this way, the NIC incorporates an economic
focus into its work that isn't seen so starkly in the other NIPUs
reviewed.

NIC has a defined corporate structure, business plan, routine reports to
the national parliament, and annual assessment of progress. Combined
with the autonomy to be completely self-directed in its focus, and its
large, publicly available database of quantitative data, NIC is seen to
be an important and legitimate actor in the UK infrastructure space.

## Summary

In this lecture, we learned about National infrastructure planning units
(NIPUs) which support effective governance through holistic,
intersectoral analysis and the prioritisation of projects at both
national and sub-national levels. Importantly, NIPUs do not replace the
role decision-makers and policy-makers play in representing the people,
but instead inform those groups and make impartial recommendations to be
decided on independently. While still relatively new in concept, NIPUs
show promise in enhancing infrastructure planning and governance through
their products to decision-makers, as well as through their data
aggregation and information sharing with stakeholders and the public.

Through a closer inspection of the Infrastructure Australia (IA) and
United Kingdom National Infrastructure Commission (NIC) NIPUs, this
mini-lecture began to explore the complexities created in governing
infrastructure in using a NIPU approach. Notably, the misalignment of
financing and planning between the IA and state-level infrastructure
providers, and the impact of the economic impetus in the NIC's directive
were discussed.

The two case studies examined focused on economically developed nations,
though this was primarily a function of visibility. Through ongoing
research, we hope to further identify similar entities and examine their
similarities and differences to other NIPUs. Regardless, we expect that
the structure of NIPUs may play a useful role in developing national
contexts by reducing the need for out-of-country experts, or at least
ensuring sustained local capacity and knowledge building.

## 
