---
title: Mini-Lecture 19.4 -- The basics of finance in infrastructure


keywords:

-   Types of finance

-   Asset lifecycles

-   Infrastructure investments

authors:

-   Nicholas Chow

---

This mini-lecture introduces the different types of infrastructure
financing and describes their relative benefits and drawbacks. It goes
further to discuss the infrastructure project attributes that attract
different types of financing and closes by highlighting how
infrastructure financing changes across the lifecycle of an
infrastructure project.

# Learning objectives

-   Recognise the different types of infrastructure financing and
    distinguish which types of projects might attract each
-   Understand the lifecycle of infrastructure assets and when financing
    and debt service takes place.

# Introduction

Traditional economists are of the opinion that infrastructure is at the
core of any economy, as it represents development, critical service for
users, and longevity. Its emplacement gives rise to confidence in its
people and economic markets, which leads to further investments. At the
start of this cycle, and with every new infrastructure project,
effective financing is foundational to success.

Infrastructure financing refers to the process of sourcing and
attributing funds to pay for infrastructure investments --- particularly
the upfront costs accrued before the asset begins providing a service.
Typically, infrastructure investments have a very high upfront capital
cost and in order to mitigate the risk seen by individual investors,
financing strategies include a multitude of financial tools, packages,
and stakeholders. It is important to note that without securing
financing, infrastructure projects cannot progress, and it is not
uncommon for well-developed projects to go unfunded for months or even
years. Political alignment of projects with policies, goals, and
powerful individuals can play an important role in this process. Other
components of infrastructure governance, especially around transparency,
corruption, procurement, and regulation, greatly influence financing and
how effectively funding is used.

This lecture will briefly discuss three important finance concepts,
covering the ideas of who finances, why they do so, and when then do so:

1. Sources of infrastructure financing
2. The attraction of infrastructure investments
3. Financing across asset lifecycles.

# Sources of infrastructure financing

Financing for infrastructure projects can arise from any number of
sources, with each type having its own benefits and drawbacks (Figure
19.4.1).

![](assets/19.4.1.png){width=100%}

**Figure 19.4.1:** A simplified layout of major funding sources in
infrastructure finance and the benefits and drawbacks most often
associated with each type of funding. Adapted from @Juneja2015 and
@InstituteforGovernment2019

Public funds are those which are sourced from government entities. This
type of funding has a low borrowing rate, as it is collected through
taxes and bonds and is spread across a wide payer-base. Collecting new
public funding can be a politically delicate process, as oftentimes they
require substantive votes from customers to raise their own rates.

Private funders typically hold large amounts of equity and invest to
earn sizeable returns over time. A major source of private funding for
infrastructure in many financial contexts is insurance firms, which plan
to exist over longer timelines and can thus accommodate the slower rates
of return accrued across the 30-100 year lifecycles associated with
infrastructure assets. Private financing is more common in
well-developed financial contexts that demonstrate stability and legal
protections for investors. Without guarantees of social and political
stability and strong legal protections some developing-nation contexts
struggle to incorporate this type of actor into infrastructure
financing.

Public-Private-Partnership funding is a relatively new financing
strategy which utilises private equity while giving investors part
ownership, and even operation, of the built asset. This allows investors
to engage in direct cost recuperation while also providing needed
infrastructure services for society.

Supra-national funding comes from international entities engaged in
providing foreign aid for infrastructure, like loans and grants.
Supra-national funding entities (e.g. World Bank, International Monetary
Fund, United Nations) are strongly influenced by shifting directives,
and due to their bureaucratic nature, require oversight and contractual
inflexibility. These funders tend to hold large technical capacity and
expertise, and sometimes provide this in lieu of direct financing.

# The attraction of infrastructure investments

Financiers are motivated to invest in projects that they believe can
provide a return on investment. Examining the benefits and customers of
infrastructure projects can help us to understand the typology of
infrastructure projects and what kinds of financing they might attract.
From this perspective, there are three types of infrastructure projects:
social, economic, and commercial [@Juneja2015].

-   **Social projects** are those that may not see immediate financial
    returns or have net negative overall costs but are a necessary
    project benefiting the entire society. These projects rarely have a
    specific beneficiary and are predominantly financed using public
    funds. Some examples of these projects include public safety and
    road infrastructure programmes.

-   **Economic projects** are those that have an explicit economic
    benefit to the market that is shared among society, and between the
    public and private sector. Private investors can identify the value
    of this project to their own operations and may choose to invest if
    it was economically viable. Examples of economic projects are ports
    and airports that encourage trade.

-   **Commercial projects** are similar to economic projects in that
    they generate net positive economic benefits to stakeholders and the
    economy, however they also benefit a specific subset of users with
    their service. With a specific user class to levee fees towards,
    these projects show the clearest economic returns and thus draw the
    greatest private investments. Examples of commercial projects
    include toll roads and metro rail projects. Supra-national
    financiers tend also to invest in commercially viable projects.

![](assets/19.4.2.png){width=100%}

**Figure 19.4.2:** Proportion of 2014 U.S. public and private spending
by infrastructure project type noting commercial projects towards the
top and social projects towards the bottom [@Chen2017;
@U.S.BureauofEconomicAnalysis2015]

# Financing across asset lifecycles

While the single largest cost of an asset is incurred during its use
phase for maintenance and operations (Figure 19.4.3), early project
financing in the planning and acquisition phases will impact that
project's entire lifecycle, especially within the first 30 years of
operations while revenues are being devoted to paying back financing
costs. Large infrastructure assets typically have lifecycles of between
30-100 years, and across this period, different kinds of financing and
financiers will be engaged with the project.

![](assets/19.4.3.jpg){width=100%}

**Figure 19.4.3:** A comparison of the magnitude of costs incurred
throughout the lifecycle of a physical infrastructure asset (adapted
from @Hanif2021)

In the planning phase, tremendous uncertainty inherent to the project is
often too risky to engage public and small-private investors and thus
large banks and financial entities are usually the first to commit to
financing a project.

Once financing has been secured, the project moves to the Acquisition
Phase, which is considered the most high-risk, as project delays are
common and unpredictable, and the project can run out of funding.
Obtaining new funding in this phase is difficult and they will come with
high rates of interest. In this phase, it is difficult for investors to
exit the project without taking a financial loss, as the project has yet
to begin generating returns.

In the Use Phase, the asset begins generating returns through providing
service to customers who pay rates. A portion of this rate revenue is
put towards paying back the entities that financed earlier phases of the
project. After debt services are fully paid off, capital financing
practices have little role to play in the asset's Disposal Phase.

# Summary

In this mini-lecture, we learned that infrastructure financing plays a
crucial role in providing upfront capital costs for constructing and
beginning operations of infrastructure assets. Infrastructure finance
strategies include a multitude of financial tools, packages, and
stakeholders, but funding sources are typically distinguished into four
types: public, private, joint (public-private), and supra-national. Each
of these funding sources bring benefits and drawbacks to the projects
being funded.

Private investors choose to support infrastructure projects because they
are typically seen as having monopolistic markets with few competitors
and thus their service is likely stable due to high demand. Payback and
returns for infrastructure projects can take place over a long period
which is undesirable for some private investors resulting in larger
private entities (insurance companies and banks) more often financing
infrastructure projects. Infrastructure projects can themselves be
distinguished into social, economic, and commercial types, with
commercial projects seeing the greatest financing by private investors
due to their clear cost recovery model, where users are charged for the
service directly. In social and economic projects, the beneficiaries are
less well-defined, and society is broadly seen to benefit.

Lastly, this mini-lecture describes the relative cost and phases of the
infrastructure lifecycle, highlighting the critical role that financing
plays in allowing infrastructure projects to procure their needed
capital in advance of when the project begins to reap returns in the Use
Phase.

Altogether, this mini-lecture describes the most foundational aspects of
infrastructure financing and should equip you to begin evaluating
infrastructure projects, understanding the objectives of their
financiers, and their likely cost recovery approach.
