---
title: Mini-Lecture 19.1 -- Introduction to the key dimensions of
  infrastructure governance
---

 

keywords:

-   Infrastructure resilience

-   Asset lifecycles

-   Levels of governance

authors:

-   Nicholas Chow

---

This lecture introduces the ideas of resilience management for
infrastructure, the key timelines for asset management, and the
differences in objectives and alignment of multi-level stakeholders.

# Learning objectives 

-   Understand how governance supports infrastructure resilience through
    the four 'R's
-   Recognise an infrastructure lifecycle diagram and understand why
    governance is important throughout the entire process
-   Identify infrastructure stakeholders at different governance levels
    and how poorly aligned goals can conflict in achieving desired
    outcomes.

  {#lecture-content-1}

# Introduction

Infrastructure governance describes the set of actions, frameworks, and
arrangements that define the interactions and operational procedures
within and between organisations, in providing infrastructure services
[@Heinimann2017]. Traditionally, the term referred only to the
planning, financing, contracting, and building of infrastructure
[@Wegrich2017]. However, within the last decade, this definition has
expanded to recognise the critical role of the intangible factors of
governance which include coordination, regulation, decision-making,
policies, and programmes. While exact definitions vary widely to suit
their unique national, sectoral, and community contexts, the term is now
generally understood to encompass both the political and strategic
management of assets in addition to their physical components.

Effective governance of public infrastructure investments is linked to
national growth and enhanced infrastructure services for customers
[@OECD2013]. Indeed, ensuring a sustained and safe service to
customers is infrastructure's core goal but in recent years this has
often been expanded upon to encompass multiple objectives that are
relevant to the public consciousness. Examples of this are governance
strategies which include goals for: environmental sustainability,
socially equitable service and access, data transparency, and
stakeholder engagement. Without infrastructure governance that is
beholden to its users and stakeholders, infrastructure projects become
vulnerable to corruption, mismanagement, cost overruns, and development
inefficiencies [@OECD2017; @Flyvbjerg2004].

In this lecture we will briefly introduce three of the fundamental
considerations in understanding and implementing effective
infrastructure governance for resilience:

> \(1\) Building resilience through infrastructure governance
>
> \(2\) The importance of infrastructure life cycles in governance
>
> \(3\) The need for multi-level infrastructure governance.

# Building resilience through infrastructure governance

Resilience is the ability of infrastructure to "resist, absorb, recover
from or successfully adapt to adversity or change in conditions"
[@USDHS2010]. Resiliency can take the form of both physical and
governance resilience, where the former refers to assets withstanding
acute material hazards like earthquakes, floods, and landslides, while
the latter refers to the durability of critical management systems and
programmes which enable resilience. Four key concepts underpin and
support infrastructure system resilience thinking: resistance,
reliability, redundancy, and response. Each of these encompass both
physical and governance resilience aspects (Figure 19.1.1).

**Figure 19.1.1:** The four pillars of infrastructure resilience showing
an example of governance actions that support each. Adapted from
@UKCabinetOffice2017.

Across these pillars of infrastructure resilience, governance plays a
key role in ensuring ongoing and evolving standards, management, and
programmes, which are critical as new infrastructure challenges arise in
the face of climate change.

Governance actions to build resilience will be context-specific, based
on policy, regulations, assets, and importantly, the customers of that
infrastructure system. An example of this in the energy-sector is
automated demand response (ADR) programmes which use economic incentives
to encourage customers to shift their energy use. These programmes are
widely recognised to provide redundant capacity to the energy grid;
however, they require customer engagement, technological expertise, and
stable and automated revenue recovery systems. In contexts without savvy
customers, ADR programmes (such as effective metering) are not
implementable, and thus more targeted governance strategies are
required.

# The importance of infrastructure lifecycles in governance

Infrastructure assets typically have expected useful lifetimes of 30-100
years (depending on the sector and asset), though we've seen that many
are utilised far past that point, as a matter of need. Despite their
variable lifetimes, all assets undergo a similar lifecycle from the
perspective of management and governance, and lifecycles are often
distinguished into: infrastructure planning, asset delivery, and service
management components (Figure 19.1.2).

**Figure 19.1.2:** A typical infrastructure management timeline broken
down into the planning, delivery, and management phases, as well as
sub-phases within [@UNOPS2018]

Across each of these phases, the governance actions and actors vary and
the incentives and goals of those pursuing the infrastructure project
shift. As such, it is imperative to understand which phase of the
infrastructure lifecycle an asset is in and which governance actors are
most relevant to that phase.

In the planning phase, assets and benefits are conceptualised and there
is an emphasis on the governance around zoning for siting facilities, as
well as securing financing for the project. This latter finance
component commonly includes borrowing and lending policies and legal
protections for private investments. In the asset delivery phase,
projects face physical construction challenges, and governance most
prominently takes the form of: 1) design and construction standards, and
2) transparency and procurement regulations. Both of these work to
ensure the asset's quality while protecting workers physically and
customers monetarily. Lastly, in the management phase, while the
infrastructure is focused on service delivery, governance is most
relevant in monitoring and reporting regulations, maintenance standards,
and environmental impacts.

# The need for multi-level infrastructure governance

Within even a single infrastructure sector, there are stakeholders
acting across different levels of infrastructure services, commonly
distinguished at the sub-national, national, and international levels
[@Lovell2018]. Actors with similar goals across each of these engage
in unique strategies to achieve outcomes, but this can lead to conflict
requiring skilful governance and management to remedy. @Heinimann2017
suggests that the new tools of governance are negotiation, dialogue,
deliberation, and consensus, and through these, effective governance,
policies, and programmes can realign stakeholders to minimise conflict
and achieve mutually desirable outcomes.

Consider, for example, a community-led water conservation group, a water
utility, and a national water resource planning agency, all with the
identical goal of ensuring long-term water security. While the
conservation group might advocate for this through the use of efficient
water fixtures, the utility might see conservation as a reduction in
purchased supply and thus revenue---a critical loss for long-term
sustained service. Similarly, the national planning agency may enshrine
a policy pushing for new water companies and supplies like desalinated
water---a strategy incompatible with both of the former actors' goals.
Effective governance in this scenario could take any number of shapes
dependent on other contextual factors, but it will almost certainly
utilise the tools described by @Heinimann2017.

This example is not unique to the water sector but demonstrates the need
for careful planning and policy implementation that considers actors
from multiple levels within infrastructure service provision. Figure
19.1.3 below shows a framework similarly identifying multi-level actors
across the energy and transportation sectors.

**Figure 19.1.3:** A generalised framework for mapping infrastructure
actors impacting governance at the sub-national, national, and
international levels, showing simplified examples of key actors across
different infrastructure sectors. Adapted from @Lovell2018.

# Summary 

In this lecture, we learned that the term infrastructure governance is
broadly applied to mean the management, planning, financing,
contracting, building, and service provision of infrastructure systems,
as well as the coordination, regulation, decision-making, policies, and
programmes that support them. The value of effective governance is
unquestioned and has been demonstrated in terms of increased national
growth and foreign investment, but also through lessened inefficiencies,
corruption, and cost overruns.

In building resilience in infrastructure, four key components are often
considered, the four 'R's: resistance, reliability, redundancy, and
response. Across each of these, active governance ---both before
(resistance, reliability, redundancy) and after (response) a hazard or
disruption---plays an important role in ensuring continued service to
customers.

The timing and lifecycle of the infrastructure assets is also important
to consider in its management, as the relevant organisations and
stakeholders shift at different phases of the project. Frameworks that
examine lifecycles are commonly distinguished into planning, delivery,
and management phases. The importance of the planning phase is rarely
overstated as governance begins far in advance of assets being built.

The last key component of infrastructure governance is effective
management across different levels. Subnational, national, and
international stakeholders have different perspectives, goals, and
timelines to be considered when establishing projects and especially
long-term policies. Without this coordination and the effective
alignment of incentives, actors may unknowingly work to the detriment of
others.

Altogether, understanding these key dimensions of infrastructure
governance should equip you to begin assessing infrastructure systems
and identifying opportunities to achieve more effective outcomes.
