---
title: Mini-Lecture 19.2 -- Common challenges in infrastructure
  governance
---

# Metadata 

## Keywords

-   Enabling environment

-   Governance challenges

-   Infrastructure development contexts

## Authors

-   Nicholas Chow

## Short description

This mini-lecture highlights important challenges in infrastructure
governance using the framework of the enabling environment to identify
common factors that can hinder effective governance. It focuses on the
importance of balanced regulations, shared legal frameworks, political
continuity, and stakeholder engagement. Succinct examples illustrate
specific instances of enabling environment factors impacting governance
and management of infrastructure.

## Learning objectives 

-   Define the enabling environment in the context of infrastructure
    development and governance
-   Develop an understanding of common infrastructure challenges seen
    across multiple sectors and national contexts
-   Recognise the unintentional negative impacts of systems and metrics
    on effective infrastructure governance.

# Lecture content  {#lecture-content-1}

## Infrastructure governance context: Enabling environment

Infrastructure projects are planned, financed, constructed, and operated
in unique governance and social settings that shift over time and space.
This complex setting is referred to as the enabling environment. One
definition for the term offered by the United Nations Office for Project
Services is *"a series of structural elements that...support achievement
of development objectives in infrastructure".* In the academic
literature, however, the term is broadly applied and is used to
encompass a multitude of factors. Thus, the literature has yet to come
to a consensus on its definition and constituent components. Research is
ongoing in the field and preliminary thinking suggests that important
constituent categories include the policy, legal, and regulatory
environments, as well as the capacity of agencies to manage
infrastructure, and human societal factors.

**Figure 19.2.1:** A simplified classification of the components of the
enabling environment for infrastructure development

These intangible, contextual aspects of infrastructure governance can
play an important role in enabling or hindering success. In the
following sections of this mini-lecture, we will illustrate a few common
challenges faced in developing effective infrastructure governance.
Through the lens of the enabling environment, we will highlight and
discuss:

1)  Balancing regulation and enforcement

2)  Transboundary governance

3)  Political continuity

4)  Participatory planning

## Balancing regulation and enforcement

**Figure 19.2.2:** A simplified classification of the components of the
enabling environment highlighting the components most relevant to
regulations

In the infrastructure sector, regulations are rules set out by
government authorities to ensure that standards for safety, service, and
integrity are met, and they are usually accompanied by a framework for
evaluation and penalty **enforcement**. Balancing regulations and
enforcement is critical for ensuring that infrastructure actors share
goals which align across different levels of sector operations.

In well-developed regulatory environments, one common challenge is
over-regulation, which insists on **reporting** and evaluation that can
become burdensome to regulated parties. Oftentimes precise goals and
metrics diminish flexibility in infrastructure management, operations,
and governance. Indeed, @Hallegatte2019 poses that the development of
poorly **designed** infrastructure regulations and metrics encourages
systems to disproportionately focus on achieving high metric outcomes at
the expense of effective service---thus creating and propagating
perverse incentives within the sector.

In lesser-developed regulatory environments, infrastructure is primarily
concerned with service delivery, and evaluation may be less
well-resourced. A symptom of this imbalance is that data collection,
management, and transparency suffer, making evaluation and improvement
hard to quantify. In settings with unreliable data, it is not uncommon
for regulators to emplace higher standards than are necessary, with the
recognition that some assets my fall short of expectations but will then
still achieve outcomes with reasonable safety.

In either of these extreme regulatory contexts, there is a need to
balance reporting requirements, data availability, and penalties, to
ensure reasonable compliance and safety, without unreasonable burden.
Through this process, infrastructure actors should have the autonomy to
flexibly meet their goals and regulatory requirements.

## Transboundary governance

**Figure 19.2.3:** A simplified classification of the components of the
enabling environment, highlighting the components most relevant to
transboundary governance

The geographies of infrastructure are important not simply because they
describe service areas, but also because they can dictate the legal
constraints of service, **management**, and interactions with other
infrastructure. In cases where geopolitical boundaries do not align to
asset management boundaries, there is an opportunity for conflict.
Geographic boundaries can be particularly important when managing assets
that share joint infrastructure networks, or those that span across
national and sub-national jurisdictional boundaries.

A critical example of ongoing governance across national boundaries is
that of the United States and Mexico, which share river flows across
their borders. The challenges that arise in creating effective
governance here tend to centre around legal disputes of **water rights**
and fulfilment of those requirements for ecosystems and
**environments**. On either side, consumers of these critical supplies
claim historic **ownership,** but differing definitions lead governments
to dispute this. Officially, the governance of these rivers had been set
forth in the U.S.-Mexico Treaty of 1944, but ongoing cooperation is an
important part of maintaining trust and follow-through on agreements---a
challenge between the two countries, but also between the governments
and their own **communities** [@Mumme2020].

This example is only one of many across the globe where it has been
imperative for infrastructure managers and decision-makers to be
deliberate about cooperative governance of resources. From the
literature, @Moore2018 recognises the importance of these joint
governance endeavours, but also demonstrates in his work that
subnational resource conflict is a burgeoning concern for infrastructure
that is widely unattended to.

## Political continuity

**Figure 19.2.4:** A simplified classification of the components of the
enabling environment, highlighting the components most relevant to
societal stability and political influence

**Political instability** is caused during leadership turnover, where
changes in power structures can yield inefficiencies in the absence of
effective transition **management policies**. Even with effective
policies, however, violent instability can give rise to challenges with
infrastructure governance beyond the physical impacts of the violence.
The World Bank notes that the intangible effects of violence lead to a
perception of future instability [@Kaufmann2011], which can be
damaging to foreign investments as confidence in **legislative
protections** are diminished.

Peaceful political turnover is routine in democratic settings but can
still lead to diminished quality of infrastructure service either
through slowdowns in bureaucracy as new power structures and process are
formed, or through deliberately diminished quality of infrastructure
services. This former outcome has been noted in contexts with long-term
infrastructure projects where a rivalling political faction or party
leaving power undermines their own progress to minimise the likelihood
of rivals claiming its success.

Systemic underfunding through the artificial suppression of
publicly-managed utility rates is a widely accepted example of
**community influence** on political leaders. Elected officials,
incentivised to placate their voter base, may choose to delay much
needed rate increases to the term of their successor. This repeated
practice, among others, has led to utilities being routinely underfunded
[@Rozenberg2019], as customers pay rates that have stagnated in
comparison to the cost of operations.

## Participatory planning 

**Figure 19.2.5:** A simplified classification of the components of the
enabling environment, highlighting the components most relevant to
participatory planning and stakeholder engagement

Participatory planning and stakeholder engagement are important in
infrastructure governance, as they enable the incorporation of local
knowledge and build confidence and community investment in successful
outcomes. Importantly, thoughtful stakeholder engagement can minimise
systemic biases by giving voice to otherwise marginalised stakeholders
like low-income households. @Parfitt2004 distinguishes the benefits of
participation by its intended outcome: whether it is undertaken as a
*means* or an *end*.

As a *means,* participation is a way to extract, interpret, and
integrate local knowledge into infrastructure development, operations,
and governance*.* It is a useful way to validate assumptions, collect
new data, anticipate **environmental** and **community** impacts, and
understand the **cultural, human and technical capacities** of the
workforce. As an *end,* participation does not necessarily seek to
gather information to inform infrastructure processes, but instead seeks
to educate and engage. It builds trust in the project, a sense of
community **ownership**, and thus an investment in its success. Through
this second approach, infrastructure projects obtain a "Social License
to Operate" (SLO).

While not usually an explicit goal in infrastructure development, a SLO
is the intangible legitimacy that is conveyed to a project by
stakeholders and communities [@Demuijnck2016]. Without some form of
SLO, communities reject infrastructure projects and can mobilise civil
partners, advocacy groups, and workers unions to disrupt or slow their
progress. One world-renowned example of an infrastructure project
critically halted due to poor community acceptance is in Bolivia's
Cochabamba Water War, where communities protesting the increasing price
of water effectively shut down facility operations by disrupting
workers.

## Summary 

In this mini-lecture, we established a simplified framework for the
enabling environment and used that as a tool to give a brief
introduction on some of the common infrastructure governance challenges
faced.
