---
title: Mini-Lecture 1.1 - Introduction to the course
---

# Metadata 

## Keywords

-   Infrastructure systems

-   Sustainable development

-   Climate adaptation and resilience

## Authors

-   Amelie Paszkowski

## Short description

This mini-lecture will provide an overview of how the course is
structured and summarises the main content. Our course is being
delivered in three modules, which are each described within this
mini-lecture.

## Learning objectives 

-   To present the structure of the course for both the lecture content
    and the hands-on sessions
-   To obtain an introductory insight into the content delivered within
    this course.

# Lecture content 

## Introduction and structure of the course

This course is centred around the role that infrastructure plays in
enabling climate compatible growth. We provide the latest science in
this field and exemplify some of the tools that can be used in planning
and designing infrastructure systems for sustainable development in a
changing climate.

Infrastructure systems underpin societies and economies all over the
world. Infrastructures are the very systems that enable societies to
function: providing potable water supply, electricity,
telecommunications, and transport mobility, amongst others.
Consequently, planning of infrastructure systems plays a fundamental
role in driving a sustainable and resilient economy in the face of
future uncertainty.

In order to provide you with the latest knowledge base and tools within
this sector, we will be delivering the course in three main modules:

1.  **Infrastructure for sustainable development**, which will entail
    seven hours of lectures (Lectures 1-7) and four hands-on sessions
    (Hands-on 1-4);

2.  **Infrastructure for climate resilience**, which will also entail
    seven hours of lectures (Lectures 8-14) and four hands-on sessions
    (Hands-on 5-8); and

3.  **Nature-based solutions for sustainable, climate-compatible
    development**, which will entail four hours of lectures (Lectures
    15-18) and two hands-on sessions (Hands-on 9-10).

The course closes with a lecture on the role of governance and finance
in planning and implementing sustainable infrastructure systems, before
the final lecture where the whole course is summarised, and key
recommendations of actions are made.

The following sections of this mini-lecture will provide an overview of
the three modules.

## Infrastructure for sustainable development

**Module lecture content:**

This module on infrastructure for sustainable development begins with
outlining the key global agendas -- the UN Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and the Paris Agreement -- and exhibits how infrastructure
systems are crucial to achieving these goals. Key datasets for assessing
infrastructure assets are outlined, which provides the base for
analysing and quantifying future infrastructure demands and defining the
infrastructure gap at a range of spatial scales.

Once the future infrastructure gap is identified, the lectures describe
key approaches of setting national visions and targets, and how to
arrive at those with key strategies or alternative strategies. Finally,
the module closes with the challenges of making decisions under
uncertainty and provides different pathways of decision-making around
infrastructure for sustainable development.

**Hands-on content:**

Throughout four hands-on sessions, we will be introducing a tool, namely
the NISMOD tool, that facilitates better understanding of the process of
evaluating the current performance of infrastructure and assessing
future demands at a national scale. Use of the tool enables identifying
the resulting infrastructure gap for a case study nation of St Lucia.
Through the use of openly available information resources, the tool will
take you through approaches to develop infrastructure strategies and
portfolios and identify pathways to achieve national targets and goals.
There is room in these hands-on sessions to develop a strategy of your
own and see how it performs on key performance indicators, including
national sustainability or emission targets.

This module on 'Infrastructure for sustainable development' therefore
provides you with the knowledge-base to understand how planning
infrastructure appropriately can underpin sustainable development, and
the application of the NISMOD tool to St Lucia gives you hands-on
experience with the methodology used for national-scale sustainable
infrastructure development by experts in the field.

## Infrastructure for climate resilience

**Module lecture content:**

The module on climate risk and resilience of infrastructure systems
examines the nature of climate risks to infrastructure systems and
services, and how information on climate risks can be used to prioritise
infrastructure adaptations that can enhance infrastructure resilience.
The module explains how climate risks to infrastructure systems can be
modelled. The lectures begin with a description of different climate
hazards and how they impact infrastructure systems. Subsequently, we
illustrate how to model infrastructure asset risk and vulnerability from
these climate hazards, and how disruptions and damages can be assessed.
The latter half of the module focuses on the future challenges;
analysing future risks to infrastructure networks as a result of climate
and socio-economic changes. Similar to the previous module, this module
finishes with the challenges of making decisions for infrastructure
resilience in the face of climate uncertainty.

**Hands-on content:**

Throughout the four hands-on sessions in this module, we will be using
Python code and QGIS to spatially assess infrastructure risks to climate
hazards in Ghana. We begin by spatially assessing the exposure of
infrastructure assets to climate hazards, and then teach you how to
model infrastructure damage and disruption. This is done for both single
and multiple points of failure. Finally, we will use the knowledge and
outcomes from the hands-on sessions to evaluate potential infrastructure
adaptation options for Ghana.

## Nature-based solutions for sustainable, climate-compatible development

**Module lecture content:**

Nature-based solutions are becoming increasingly attractive as solutions
for addressing the three challenges of: climate change, biodiversity
loss, and meeting global development needs. This module assesses the
opportunities for nature-based solutions, including green (terrestrial)
and blue (marine and coastal) ecosystems, to protect, complement or
substitute grey infrastructure service delivery in order to deliver on
global development agendas. The module begins with the role that
nature-based solutions play in underpinning global agendas (SDGs and the
Paris Agreement) and in underpinning the functioning of engineered
infrastructure systems. Subsequently, examples are provided on how
nature-based solutions can enable risk reduction and increase resilience
to climate change through regulating water extremes, coastal protection,
erosion and landslide control and urban cooling. Following on from this,
we illustrate how nature-based solutions can be integrated with core
infrastructure sectors, to improve their performance and enhance their
resilience, including potable water supply, wastewater treatment,
transport, energy, digital communications and the built environment.
Finally, the module concludes with key methods and approaches to be used
in the processes of information requisition, decision-making,
cost-benefits analysis, and implementation when integrating nature-based
solutions into grey infrastructure systems.

**Hands-on content:**

In the two hands-on sessions we introduce two new tools developed for
integrating nature-based solutions into global agendas and into
infrastructure planning and development. The first tool is a new
framework on how to use nature to influence the SDGs, based in Excel.
The second tool is a new framework developed by UNEP (United Nations
Environment Programme), UNOPS (United Nations Office for Project
Services) and our group in the Environmental Change Institute at Oxford
University, which enables the integration of nature-based solutions in
core infrastructure sectors for the delivery on the SDGs.

## Concluding remarks

This course is targeted at anyone who is interested in understanding the
role that infrastructure plays in underpinning sustainable and resilient
development in the face of climate change. We provide you with the most
up-to-date knowledge-base in this field, and a selection of the tools
that we use on a daily basis for modelling and assessing these
challenges. Our work directly underpins the decision-making process in
many countries around the world, and hope that this course can provide
others with tools and ideas to engage with sustainable infrastructure
development in your countries of interest.
