---
title: "Mini-Lecture 1.4 -- Case study: Infrastructure challenges in a
  small-island context"
---

# Metadata

## Keywords

-   Small islands

-   Infrastructure vision

-   Infrastructure systems modelling

## Authors

-   Daniel Adshead

## Short description

This lecture will introduce infrastructure assessment in the context of
country-specific challenges and will provide a brief background to a
recent infrastructure assessment in the Caribbean island of Saint Lucia,
focusing on key infrastructure challenges in the small island context.
This study will be drawn upon throughout many of the following lectures
and throughout the hands-on sessions in this module.

## Learning objectives

-   To describe, with examples, how infrastructure challenges vary in
    different country contexts

-   To list types of infrastructure challenges that often affect small
    island countries.

# Lecture content

## Introduction: Identifying infrastructure challenges in various national contexts

Countries come in all types: advanced economies, small island developing
states, large industrialising countries, rapidly developing city-states,
post-conflict, post-disaster contexts, and so on (Figure 1.4.1). Each
has its own set of challenges for infrastructure decision-makers, who
must assess which types of infrastructure solutions are best-suited to
enable a prosperous future.

Considering context-based challenges allows infrastructure planning to
be designed specifically around future needs, targets, and visions. The
geographic, environmental, economic, and political characteristics of a
country or region will define which infrastructure policies,
investments, and projects may be feasibly implemented, or be most
effective to meet these future objectives.

**Figure 1.4.1:** Examples of infrastructure-related challenges. Photos:
Unsplash.

For example, countries with rapidly growing cities must ensure the
provision of services, such as transport or waste treatment, to support
this urbanisation. Rapidly emerging countries or regions may prioritise
digital or financial infrastructure to support advanced economic
activity. Countries facing destructive forces from conflict or natural
disasters can aim to 'build back better' so as to ensure more resilient
systems in the future -- although the nature of the hazard must be
assessed independently for each country or region.

Recent examples of unique infrastructure challenges assessed in
different country contexts are shown in Figure 1.4.2.

**abc**

**Figure 1.4.2:** Examples of specific infrastructure challenges in a
post-conflict (Palestine), small-island (Curacao), and advanced economy
(UK) context. a) Kernel density map derived from satellite imagery
representing damages sustained during the 2014 conflict in Gaza
[@Ives2018a]; b) Flood risk to coastal areas and built assets
[@Adshead2018]; c) Train travel times to London with and without
high-speed rail extensions [@Hall2012]

This mini-lecture will introduce the Caribbean country of Saint Lucia,
which faces unique infrastructure challenges as a small island but which
can ensure its future prosperity through targeted interventions to align
its infrastructure with a national vision defined by development targets
and objectives. This case study will be used to illustrate an
interdependent national infrastructure systems modelling approach
throughout the following lectures and hands-on sessions.

## Quantifying and projecting infrastructure challenges in small islands: An example of the Caribbean island of Saint Lucia

Infrastructure forms the backbone of Saint Lucia\'s society, delivering
services that provide the daily needs of its citizens while supporting a
tourism‐based economy that brings hundreds of thousands of visitors to
the island each year [@Adshead2021].

However, the island is threatened with vast undersupply in the
infrastructure it needs in many of its key sectors.

In Figure 1.4.3, electricity is shown to be the only one of these
infrastructure services which currently meets the population\'s needs,
though the capacity margin will be eroded in future unless generation
capacity is increased, demand is reduced, or efficiencies are integrated
into the network. Water supply, wastewater treatment, and solid waste
management capacity are all below current needs [@Adshead2021].

**Figure 1.4.3:** Current and projected infrastructure capacity in
relation to needs to 2030 across four key sectors in Saint Lucia
[@Adshead2021]

The impacts of climate-related hazards, such as flooding and sea level
rise, on Saint Lucia's built infrastructure and natural environment also
pose a major threat to social and economic development on the island
(Figure 1.4.4). These will be addressed in more detail, showing specific
examples from the case study, in the course lecture blocks on risk and
resilience (e.g. 13.4).

![](media/image6.tiff){width="6.5in"
height="4.1506944444444445in"}**Figure 1.4.4:** Climate-related hazards
affecting Saint Lucia's built infrastructure and natural environment
[@Adshead2020]

The next sections will discuss in more depth Saint Lucia's
infrastructure challenges in the context of long-term planning, and how
infrastructure can overcome the challenges to achieve a national vision
for prosperity in the country.

## Understanding small-island infrastructure challenges

As a first step in the infrastructure assessment, key challenges facing
several of Saint Lucia's infrastructure sectors were identified (Figure
1.4.5). These were placed in the context of the specific geographic,
environmental, economic, and political factors that define small island
countries:

-   **Energy sector:** Saint Lucia relies almost entirely on diesel,
    which supplies approximately 97% of the island's electricity needs.
    This fuel must be imported, with a cost to the government of around
    10% of GDP annually, and is subject to fluctuating global energy
    prices. Residential electricity tariffs are high -- nearly triple
    the average price in the United States.

-   **Water sector:** Saint Lucia faces large water security challenges
    in the dry season due to reduced river flows, low volumes of
    storage, and high demand from tourists. Siltation of the island's
    only dam has led to a reduction in reservoir storage capacity,
    reducing supply to treatment plants. Additionally, approximately 30%
    of total water supply is lost through physical leaks in the
    transmission system, and a further 26% from theft or metering
    inaccuracies.

-   **Wastewater sector:** Current treatment levels are inadequate with
    the island's only treatment plant operating under-capacity. High
    levels of bacteria and the transmission of water-borne diseases are
    public health risks, and uncontrolled discharge threatens the safety
    of public and tourist beaches, as well as terrestrial and marine
    ecosystems.

-   **Waste sector:** As a small island, Saint Lucia's landfill capacity
    is limited, with its one remaining landfill site reaching the end of
    its lifespan within the next five years. This necessitates increased
    dumping and informal waste incineration -- or the need to export
    waste at a high cost.

**Figure 1.4.5:** Key challenges across four of Saint Lucia's main
infrastructure sectors -- water, electricity, solid waste management,
wastewater treatment. Photos: Unsplash; FFelix (UNOPS); GoSL.

## Designing sustainable infrastructure to inform a national vision for prosperity

A national vision for Saint Lucia's future prosperity was developed,
defined by government priorities (e.g. Figure 1.4.6) as well as the
resources and innovative solutions available to the small island (e.g.
Figure 1.4.7). As with the key challenges, these were defined according
to sector:

-   **Energy sector:** Embrace modern renewables such as solar, wind,
    and geothermal to reduce long-term costs, emissions, and pollution​.
    On the demand and efficiency side, incorporate high-tech
    efficiencies into new housing, government buildings, and tourist
    facilities to reduce energy needs.

-   **Water sector:** Develop a secure, reliable, and efficient water
    supply system that provides for all communities, particularly during
    the dry season, by implementing a mix of water treatment and storage
    capacity​. Pursue demand and water efficiency initiatives that
    utilise available resources to meet increased demand from tourists
    and the agricultural sector, creating economic opportunities for the
    island's residents​.

-   **Wastewater sector:** Provide safe levels of collection and
    treatment of the island's wastewater, using centralised and
    community-based options and building on synergies with the water
    supply sector​. Limit terrestrial and marine ecosystem deterioration
    caused by untreated wastewater discharge, harnessing opportunities
    for long-term employment and economic growth from the tourism
    sector​.

-   **Waste sector:** Preserve Saint Lucia's natural environment for
    locals and tourists by sustainably managing waste and creating
    economic opportunities for local residents. Harness waste to grow
    Saint Lucia's circular economy by supporting the recycling and
    compost industries​.

**Figure 1.4.6:** Saint Lucia's vision for national infrastructure is
based around the government's national priorities, which include reaping
economic benefits from its natural beauty and tourism sector, as well as
developing other sectors, such as agriculture, to ensure
self-sufficiency and food security. Photos: FFelix (UNOPS); Pexels;
Unsplash

**Figure 1.4.7:** Examples of effective infrastructure solutions in a
small-island context. For example, regional (inter-island) waste
solutions and organic composting, high renewable energy generation
potential, water storage and rainwater harvesting for dry season use.
Photos: FFelix (UNOPS); LUCELEC; Saint Lucia News Online

## How the small island case study was implemented

## The case study took the form of a participatory national infrastructure assessment consisting of a series of analysis steps discussed further in the next lectures: the identification and quantification of drivers of future infrastructure needs; the aggregation of investment and policy options to increase supply capacity or reduce demand; the targets that define optimal performance achievement; and the interdependent modelling that brings these components together. These steps are represented in Figure 1.4.8.

**Figure 1.4.8:** Schematic overview of the components within the
National Infrastructure Systems Model (NISMOD) [@Adshead2020]

This assessment relied on strong stakeholder interaction through a
centralised infrastructure planning unit in the country: the National
Integrated Planning and Program (NIPP) unit, embedded within the
Department of Finance. The unit is tasked with driving forward this
integrated approach to policymaking, coordinating aspects of regulation,
finance, project delivery, operations and maintenance, and human
capacity, and provides a means to move away from a siloed approach to
infrastructure (Figure 1.4.9).

Close interaction with the NIPP over the course of this study has
ensured that national priorities and targets are established and pursued
collectively with the input of all relevant stakeholders in the
Government of Saint Lucia, research institutions, and the private
sector, and regularly informed by the latest available data. Results
from this assessment suggest that this will provide Saint Lucia with an
infrastructure planning approach that will be cheaper, more efficient,
and more closely aligned with national goals and international
commitments in the long run. Providing decision-makers with the
required, evidence‐based tools to undertake strategic infrastructure
assessment will better equip the government to make effective
investments and policies in the future [@Adshead2021].

**Figure 1.4.9:** Role of the National Integrated Planning and Programme
unit (NIPP) in coordinating efforts to ensure streamlined and efficient
infrastructure development [@Adshead2020]

## Summary

This lecture has highlighted the diversity of infrastructure challenges
found in different country contexts. It has introduced a case study
addressing infrastructure challenges and potential solutions in the
small island country of Saint Lucia, which will be referenced throughout
the following lectures and hands-on sessions.
