---
title: Mini-Lecture 3.1- Overview of needed infrastructure data
---

# Metadata 

## Keywords

-   Infrastructure

-   Data

## Authors 

-   Sapphire Vital

## Short description 

To begin Lecture Block 3, this mini-lecture provides an overview of the
infrastructure data needed to assess systems' current performance. There
are various primary datasets such as supply, demand, capacity, design
life, and carbon emissions that need to be collected to capture a clear
picture of an infrastructure system.

## Learning objectives 

-   Indicate critical data fields needed to assess current
    infrastructure systems
-   Describe the utility of each type of data needed.

# Lecture content 

## Introduction 

Evaluating the status of current infrastructure systems is the first
step in the evidence-based infrastructure development process
[@Adshead2018a] (see Figure 3.1.1). Current infrastructure
performance is evaluated based on needed service levels in a particular
country. To do this, data on current infrastructure systems needs to be
collected. The collected data enables the analysis of future
infrastructure needs and informs infrastructure development strategies.
The needed data covers key technical, social, economic, and
environmental features of infrastructure systems. The following sections
expand on each of these areas.

![](media/image1.png){width="6.3572583114610675in"
height="2.791489501312336in"}

**Figure 3.1.1:** Evidence-based infrastructure development process
[@Adshead2018a]

## Technical features of infrastructure systems: Supply versus demand

Infrastructure systems consist of supply and demand components. Supply
infrastructure provides the specific infrastructure service, while
demand elements drive how much of the service is needed. Table 3.1.1
below illustrates examples of supply infrastructure in each of the
networked infrastructure systems.

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Networked infrastructure       | **Supply infrastructure**        |
| system**                         |                                  |
+==================================+==================================+
| **Electricity**                  | -   Diesel generation            |
|                                  | -   Nuclear reactors             |
|                                  | -   Natural gas power plants     |
|                                  | -   Coal power plants            |
|                                  | -   Solar thermal or             |
|                                  |     photovoltaic systems         |
|                                  | -   On and offshore wind farms   |
|                                  | -   Hydropower generation        |
|                                  |     facility                     |
|                                  | -   Geothermal plant             |
|                                  | -   Biomass energy generation    |
|                                  | -   Waste to energy facilities   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Transport**                    | -   Modes: cars, trucks, buses,  |
|                                  |     trains, aircrafts, boats     |
|                                  | -   Route infrastructure: road   |
|                                  |     networks, railroads          |
|                                  | -   Terminal infrastructure: bus |
|                                  |     and train stations,          |
|                                  |     airports, freight ports,     |
|                                  |     cruise ship terminals        |
|                                  | -   Fueling stations: gas        |
|                                  |     stations, electric vehicle   |
|                                  |     charging ports               |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Water (including wastewater)** | -   Water and wastewater         |
|                                  |     treatment plants             |
|                                  | -   Desalination plants          |
|                                  | -   Raw intakes                  |
|                                  | -   Water distribution systems   |
|                                  | -   Sewerage networks            |
|                                  | -   Septic tanks                 |
|                                  | -   Pit latrines                 |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Waste**                        | -   Landfills                    |
|                                  | -   Dumps                        |
|                                  | -   Recycling facilities         |
|                                  | -   Waste to energy facilities   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Digital communication**        | -   Fixed telephone networks     |
|                                  | -   Mobile networks              |
|                                  | -   Fixed broadband networks     |
|                                  | -   Data centres                 |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

**Table 3.1.1:** Inexhaustive examples of supply assets of network
infrastructure systems [@Adshead2018b; @Adshead2020; @Malmodin2018]

Further, the most common demand components include domestic, commercial,
industry, and system losses. Specific areas within these categories may
also be considered. For instance, for the waste sector, demand data may
be collected based on the disposal protocol for different materials. For
example, data may be disaggregated based on the following categories:
hotels, cruise ships, agriculture, biomedical, pharmaceuticals, tires,
fiberglass, and asbestos.

## Technical features of infrastructure systems: Capacity and design life

It is important to capture the capacity of each infrastructure system.
Capacity here refers to the quantity of service each infrastructure
component can supply. The units used to capture the capacity of each
infrastructure system should be uniform. Table 3.1.2 below depicts
applicable capacities and units in each networked infrastructure system.

+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Networked infrastructure       | **Capacity description**         |
| system**                         |                                  |
+==================================+==================================+
| **Electricity**                  | -   Power generation ability:    |
|                                  |     Static generation is         |
|                                  |     measured in Watts (W) while  |
|                                  |     generation over a period of  |
|                                  |     time is measured in Watt     |
|                                  |     hours (Wh)                   |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Transport**                    | -   Number of transportation     |
|                                  |     modes in the country by type |
|                                  | -   Length of transportation     |
|                                  |     routes measured in           |
|                                  |     kilometres or miles          |
|                                  | -   Estimated number of          |
|                                  |     transportation modes         |
|                                  |     accommodated by              |
|                                  |     transportation routes        |
|                                  | -   Number of transportation     |
|                                  |     terminals                    |
|                                  | -   Number of modes (buses,      |
|                                  |     airplanes, boats etc.)       |
|                                  |     accommodated by              |
|                                  |     transportation terminals     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Water (including wastewater)** | -   Volume of water supplied     |
|                                  |     over a period of time often  |
|                                  |     measured in cubic metres per |
|                                  |     year                         |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Waste**                        | -   Weight of waste disposed     |
|                                  |     often measured in tonnes     |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Digital Communication**        | -   Number of static network     |
|                                  |     towers                       |
|                                  | -   Length of network            |
|                                  |     transmission infrastructure  |
+----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

**Table 3.1.2:** Examples of infrastructure capacity descriptors in
networked infrastructure systems [@Adshead2018b]

It is also important to note the design life or lifespan of each
infrastructure component in order to assess their operation statuses.
For instance, a diesel electricity generation plant may provide a
significant portion of electricity to a community but be aged and in
need of replacement within two years. The facility would therefore be a
critical consideration when projecting future infrastructure needs.

## Social features of infrastructure systems: Population served

The number of people served by infrastructure system assets indicates
the coverage of that particular service. Comparing the percentage of
population with access to services to national targets illuminates the
gaps that need to be filled and the underserved proportion of the
population (given the location of the service provision is also
specified). This knowledge is needed to design country specific
infrastructure development strategies. For instance, a country may be
100% electrified but has wastewater treatment facilities that only cover
its capital. This country therefore would allocate more resource towards
improving the wastewater system.

## Economic features of infrastructure systems: monetary value 

The capital and expenditure costs of infrastructure assets are needed to
evaluate the cost-effectiveness of varying infrastructure development
strategies. For instance, varying types of electricity interventions
have different price points over their lifespans. For example,
geothermal energy generation plants have high initial costs but high
energy generation at low implementation costs over a long design life,
while a diesel energy generation plant may initially cost less but incur
high fuel bills over its lifespan. Research has shown that long-term
infrastructure strategies that maximise sustainable development and
consider the Paris Agreement are the most cost-effective
[@Adshead2021]. Such strategies take advantage of interdependencies
between infrastructure systems as well as low-hanging fruit such as
improving system efficiency.

## Environmental features of infrastructure systems: Carbon emissions 

The carbon emissions from each infrastructure component should be
estimated to capture the contribution of the infrastructure systems to
climate change. Other environmental attributes of infrastructure
systems, such as landfill versus recycling and conventional vehicles
versus electric vehicles, are captured in the data on systems' technical
features.

Estimating carbon emissions can be approached via a variety of
methodologies. Data on the carbon intensity of infrastructure assets may
be obtained from national greenhouse gas inventories whose methodologies
should reflect the recommendations and guidelines of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change.

## Summary 

This mini-lecture provided an overview of the data required to assess
the current performance of infrastructure systems. The data required,
inclusive of technical, social, economic, and environmental components,
is needed to evaluate infrastructure gaps, project future needs, and
ultimately devise infrastructure development strategies in line with
national priorities and global agendas such as the Sustainable
Development Goals and the Paris Agreement.
