---
title: Mini-Lecture 12.2 - Projecting Future Climate
---

 

keywords:

-   Climate change

-   Climate model

-   Emission scenarios

authors: 

-   Jasper Verschuur

--- 

In this lecture we will answer the question: "How do we predict future
change in climate?" We will discuss the use of climate models to predict
future conditions including the kind of scenarios they are driven by and
how they can inform risk management.

# Learning objectives 

-   Learn what a climate model is
-   Compare and contrast the outcomes of different climate scenarios
-   Recognise that climate impacts may differ across regions.

 

# Introduction 

Most of us check the weather forecast on a daily basis, but not many of
us look at a forecast of climate. There is often a lot of confusion
between the two concepts. Therefore, it is important to understand what
they mean. In short, we can say:

"Climate is what you expect, weather is what you get."

Or in more scientific terms, climate is the average of daily weather
over a period of around 30 years. Thus, although weather changes from
day to day, the climate in a certain location should be fixed. If you
plot a time series of temperature over time, we would expect it to
wiggle from year to year but to have no long-term trend. However, if we
look at the global average temperature over time (since 1850), which is
shown in Figure 12.2.1, we see that this is not the case. We can clearly
see that the climate is changing over time.

The main cause of the increase in temperature, and hence shift in
climate, is the anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions we put into the
atmosphere, which cause the climate to change and directly affects the
key climate variables such as temperature, precipitation and wind speed.
More information can be found
[here](https://www.noaa.gov/education/resource-collections/climate). We
will mainly focus on two aspects: how we model the future climate and
how these model projections inform us on future climate risk.

**Figure 12.2.1:** The evolution of global mean surface temperature
between 1850 and present. The different colours indicate different data
sources [@EuropeanEnvironmentalAgence2020]

# Global climate models

To model how the climate might change in the future, we use so-called
General Circulation Models (GCMs). GCMs are numerical (mathematical)
models that represent physical, biological and chemical processes in the
atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and land surface. Given the complexity of
all equations that are in a GCM, they must be solved numerically, which
means that instead of providing exact solutions at every exact location,
the results represent averages over regions and time. The level of
detail used depends on the model resolution and the time step used.

A climate model divides up the Earth into a series of grid cells around
the Earth, which are stacked into different layers (layers in ocean and
atmosphere) (Figure 12.2.2). Most climate models have a spatial
resolution of around 100km and solve the equations every hour or day.
However, over the years, climate models have become much more detailed:
the first models in 1990 had a 500km resolution, whereas the newest
models have resolutions below 100km.

The main inputs into GCMs are the external factors that change the
amount of the sun's energy that is observed by the Earth and is trapped
in the atmosphere (see more information
[here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth%27s_energy_budget)). The main
anthropogenic external forcings are greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide,
methane, nitrous oxides), which we have good records of, that help us
test whether the GCM can reproduce the observed temperature trend. This
step is essential before we can use a GCM to project into the future.

**Figure 12.2.2:** A schematic representation of a global climate model
with the horizontal and vertical grids that are used to simulate the
climate, land and ocean processes [@GFDL]

# Representative Concentration Pathways

In order to predict how the future climate might look, we need scenarios
of external forcing that we can feed into the climate model. To do this,
scientists have developed a number of Representative Concentration
Pathways (RCPs) which provide plausible descriptions of the future,
based on socio-economic scenarios of how global society grows and
develops. These RCPs are based on various scenarios of a range of
variables including socio-economic change, technological change, energy
and land use, and emissions of greenhouse gases and air pollutants
[@Vuuren2011]. The main RCP scenarios used are RCP2.6, RCP4.5, RCP6.0
and RCP8.5, with the number indicating the total amount of carbon
dioxide (CO2) emissions in the atmosphere in 2100 (in Giga tonnes).

In Figures 12.2.3-5, the changes in population, gross domestic product,
primary energy consumption, oil consumption, and the resulting CO~2~
concentrations in the atmosphere are shown. As can be seen, RCP2.6 is a
very ambitious scenario with moderate population growth, continuous
economic growth, low energy consumption and very low oil consumption,
resulting in a strongly decarbonized economy with low CO~2~
concentrations. On the other hand, RCP8.5 covers high population growth,
moderate GDP growth, large and primarily fossil-fuel dependent energy
consumption, resulting in very high CO~2~ concentrations.

These scenarios help us to explore alternative futures, including the
associated uncertainty in how the climate might change.

**Figure 12.2.3:** The population and gross domestic product trajectory
per RCP scenario [@Vuuren2011]

**Figure 12.2.4:** The primary energy and oil consumption trajectories
per RCP scenario [@Vuuren2011]

**Figure 12.2.5:** The carbon dioxide trajectories per RCP scenario
[@Vuuren2011]

# Predicting future climate

The various RCP scenarios can be used to force a climate model and
predict how the climate might change in the future. Across the world,
many climate models have been developed, which are all based on slightly
different model specifications.

It is often hard to justify why one model is better than the other.
Instead, we use an ensemble of climate models to project multiple
realisations of the future climate based on the results of the
individual climate models. For instance, in the most recent 'Coupled
Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6' (CMIP6) project, the climate
model ensemble that forms the basis for the [IPCC
report](https://www.ipcc.ch), includes climate models from 49 different
modelling groups [@Eyring2016].

In Figure 12.2.6, the global mean temperature warming for 2100 compared
to pre-industrial (1880-1900) is shown for both the CMIP5 ensemble and
the CMIP6 ensemble under various RCPs. A number of observations can be
made. First, for RCP2.6, future warming is around 2°C in the CMIP6
ensemble, whereas for RCP8.5 the warming is 5°C. Second, the CMIP6
models project a larger warming than CMIP5, which is mainly due to the
improved representations of various physical processes in the models
(for instance, clouds and aerosols). Third, the spread between the
models can be quite large. For instance, for the RCP8.5 scenario, the
lowest CMIP6 model projects 3.8°C of warming, whereas the highest CMIP6
model projects 7.4°C of warming.

**Figure 12.2.6:** Prediction of changes in global mean surface
temperature for the different climate scenarios. The range indicates the
spread in model results, with the dot the median value and the range the
smallest and largest model result [@CarbonBrief2019]

# Regional climate variations

From the previous section, one takeaway was that the spread across
models can be large. Another important point is that the climate might
change differently in varying locations and over time. Figure 12.2.7
shows the expected change in precipitation over Africa for two scenarios
(RCP4.5 top, RCP8.5 bottom) and two time slices (2030-2059 left,
2070-2099 right) [@Almazroui2020]. In all figures, a clear
geographical difference can be seen. The North and South of Africa will
experience a decrease in precipitation, whereas the Sahara and central
parts of Africa will experience an increase in precipitation. The
regional effect becomes stronger with a larger warming (RCP8.5 vs
RCP4.5), illustrating that an increase in climate change will increase
the geographical disparities in expected changes. Moreover, the time is
also important to consider here. For RCP4.5, the 2070-2099 shows
slightly higher changes than the 2030-2059 time slice, but results do
not differ much. In contrast, for the RCP8.5 scenario, a much stronger
signal is evident than in the 2030-2059 time slice. In addition, the two
scenarios also illustrate the uncertainty in the projections. For the
RCP4.5 scenario, some areas of Africa (Côte D'Ivoire, Ghana) see a mild
increase in precipitation, whereas for RCP8.5 they will experience a
decrease.

This all shows that, for risk analysis purposes, we need to evaluate the
regional changes under multiple climate scenarios and models to
understand the range of plausible futures that our infrastructure system
might face.

**Figure 12.2.7:** Precipitation changes over the African continent for
two time slices (2030-2059 and 2070-2099) and two climate and
socio-economic scenarios (RCP4.5 and RCP8.5, and SSP2 and SSP5)
[@Almazroui2020]

# Summary 

In this lecture we have looked at how the climate is changing globally.
We described how we make use of climate models and projections to
predict how the climate might look in the future. The climate might
change differently in different regions, making it important to look at
regional changes.
